
  
    Copyright © 1999 American Society of Plant Physiologists
               The MADS-Domain Protein AGAMOUS-Like 15 Accumulates in Embryonic Tissues with Diverse Origins1
               
                  Sharyn E. Perry2, 
                     
                     Melissa D. Lehti and 
                     
                     Donna E. Fernandez
                           *
                  
                           
                           1
                           Department of Botany, University of Wisconsin, 430 Lincoln Drive, Madison, Wisconsin 53706–1381
                        
                     
                  
               
                  
                      Next Section
                  Abstract
                  
                  AGL15 (AGAMOUS-like 15), a member of the MADS-domain family of regulatory factors, accumulates preferentially in the organs and tissues derived
                     from double fertilization in flowering plants (i.e. the embryo, suspensor, and endosperm). The developmental role of AGL15
                     is still undefined. If it is involved in embryogenesis rather than some other aspect of seed biology, then AGL15 protein should
                     accumulate whenever development proceeds in the embryonic mode, regardless of the origin of those embryos or their developmental
                     context. To test this, we used AGL15-specific antibodies to analyze apomictic embryogenesis in dandelion (Taraxacum officinale), microspore embryogenesis in oilseed rape (Brassica napus), and somatic embryogenesis in alfalfa (Medicago sativa). In every case, AGL15 accumulated to relatively high levels in the nuclei of the embryos. AGL15 also accumulated in cotyledon-like
                     organs produced by thextc2(e
                     
                        xt
                        
                     ra
                     
                        c
                        
                     otyledon
                     
                        2
                        ) mutant of Arabidopsis and during precocious germination in oilseed rape. Furthermore, the subcellular localization of AGL15
                     appeared to be developmentally regulated in all embryogenic situations. AGL15 was initially present in the cytoplasm of cells
                     and became nuclear localized before or soon after embryogenic cell divisions began. These results support the hypothesis that
                     AGL15 participates in the regulation of programs active during the early stages of embryo development.
                  
                  
               
               In seed plants, the sporophyte generation initiates with a unique developmental phase: the seed or embryo phase. During this
                  phase, morphogenetic programs operate to establish the correct embryo form, storage reserves accumulate, desiccation tolerance
                  is acquired, and a quiescent state is established that can be exited in a controlled manner at a later point. The early stages
                  of embryo development have been difficult to study because the cells constituting the embryo are small, few in number, and
                  embedded in several layers of maternal tissues. Much progress has been made recently in isolating genes encoding regulatory
                  factors expressed during early embryogenesis (Li and Thomas, 1998; Lotan et al., 1998; Luerssen et al., 1998; for reviews of other genes, see Mordhorst et al., 1997; Berleth, 1998); however, relatively little is known about the corresponding gene products in terms of activity and/or regulation.
               
               Although it is not restricted to embryos, the MADS-box regulatory factor AGL15(
                     AG
                     
                  AMOUS-
                  
                     l
                     
                  ike
                  
                     15
                     ) is expressed at approximately 10-fold higher levels during the embryonic phase than during any other phase of the life cycle
                  (Heck et al., 1995; Rounsley et al., 1995). Members of the MADS-domain family contain a highly conserved, 55- to 60-amino acid motif (the MADS domain) that functions
                  as both a DNA-binding and dimerization domain (for review, see Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997). MADS-domain proteins are found in plants, animals, and fungi and often play critical roles in the control of development.
                  In Arabidopsis and snapdragon, for example, proteins such as APETALA1/SQUAMOSA, AGAMOUS/PLENA, APETALA3/DEFICIENS,andPISTILLATA/GLOBOSA
                  play central roles in the specification of meristem and floral organ identity (for review, see Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997). MADS-box gene families are quite large in plants but not in animals and fungi. At least 15 different members may be present
                  in ferns (Münster et al., 1997) and more than 28 have already been identified in Arabidopsis (Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997). AGL15 is one of the most divergent members of the family in Arabidopsis (Rounsley et al., 1995) and is the only member isolated to date that is expressed preferentially during embryogenesis.
               
               AGL15-specific antibodies and immunohistochemistry were used previously to demonstrate that AGL15 accumulation and localization
                  are developmentally regulated during zygotic embryogenesis. AGL15 accumulates in the cytoplasm of cells of the female germ
                  unit before fertilization and moves into the nuclei after the first few cell divisions in the embryo, suspensor, and endosperm
                  (Perry et al., 1996). Relatively high levels of AGL15 are maintained in the embryo nuclei throughout the period of morphogenesis and then decline
                  as the embryo matures. Based on this accumulation pattern and the fact that it is similar in dicot and monocot embryos, we
                  have proposed that AGL15 plays a conserved regulatory role during the early stages of the embryonic phase (Heck et al., 1995; Perry et al., 1996). If this role is important for the process of embryogenesis, AGL15 should accumulate in the nuclei in all young embryos
                  and new embryonic organs regardless of when and how they initiate. To test this idea, we used AGL15-specific antibodies to
                  examine a variety of developmental situations in a variety of flowering plants in which embryos or embryonic organs arise
                  outside of the seed context or by means other than the fertilization of an egg. In every case we found that whenever embryos
                  or embryonic organs were present, relatively high levels of AGL15 could be detected in the nuclei.
               
               
                  Previous SectionNext Section
                  
                  MATERIALS AND METHODS
                  
                  
                     
                     Plant Material
                     
                     Oilseed rape (Brassica napus cv Tower) plants were grown in a controlled-environment chamber (Conviron, Pembina, ND), under a 16-h light (370 μE m−2s−1 at flower level) and 8-h dark regime (at 15°C and 10°C, respectively). Flowers on the primary inflorescence were hand-pollinated
                        and tagged on the day they opened. For protein gel-blot analyses, zygotic embryos were collected at 30 DAP. Pea (Pisum sativum cv Little Marvel) plants were grown under the same conditions and zygotic embryos were collected at the early-cotyledon stage.
                     
                     
                     Arabidopsis (Landsberg erecta ecotype) wild-type plants and plants homozygous for the xtc2 mutation were grown at 22°C in constant light (88 μE m−2s−1). For collection of secondary cotyledons and leaves, seeds were sown on germination medium containing Murashige and Skoog
                        salts and vitamins (Murashige and Skoog, 1962) supplemented with 10 g L−1 Suc, 0.5 g L−1 Mes, and 7 g L−1agar, pH 5.6 to 5.7, chilled at 4°C for 2 d, and grown for 10 to 12 d. R.S. Poethig (University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia)
                        provided the xtc2 mutant seed.
                     
                     
                     Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) flowers of various stages from small buds to open flowers were collected on the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus during
                        the spring of 1996.
                     
                     
                     Alfalfa (Medicago sativa) fruits were collected from field-grown plants during the summer of 1998. S. Austin-Phillips (Biotechnology Center, University
                        of Wisconsin, Madison) provided mature leaf tissue for the production of somatic embryos. Clones of a specific alfalfa genotype
                        derived by a cross between Regen S and Regen Y, Regen-SY-27 (Bingham, 1991), were grown in an environmental chamber under a 16-h light (300 μE m−2s−1) and 8-h dark regime (at 21°C and 19°C, respectively).
                     
                     
                     Maize (Zea mays) zygotic embryos (early-maturation stage) were recovered by dissecting kernels removed from sweet corn obtained at a local
                        grocery store during July and August of 1998.
                     
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     
                     Precocious Germination of Oilseed Rape Embryos
                     
                     Using tungsten knives, we excised the developing embryos aseptically from 47-DAP seeds and placed them into culture on Monnier's
                        embryo medium (Monnier, 1976) containing 1% Suc (w/v) in glass jars as described by Fernandez (1997). The embryos were allowed to develop for 27 d at 25°C under constant cool-white fluorescent light.
                     
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     
                     Oilseed Rape Microspore Embryogenesis System
                     
                     Microspore embryogenesis was performed as described by Crouch (1982). We collected the oilseed rape flower buds (2.7–3.8 mm in length) from the primary inflorescence before the first flower
                        opened. At this stage anthers contained uninucleate microspores or early binucleate pollen. We rinsed the flower buds in sterile
                        water and aseptically removed the anthers and placed them dehiscence-line-up on medium as described by Crouch (1982). The cultures were incubated in the dark at 30°C for 2 weeks, after which time they were maintained in the dark at room temperature.
                        We prepared the embryos, unorganized masses, and mature pollen derived from anther culture for immunohistochemistry analysis
                        as described previously by Perry et al. (1996).
                     
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     
                     Alfalfa Somatic Embryogenesis System
                     
                     Somatic embryogenesis was performed as described by Austin et al. (1995) with some modifications. We collected the first and second fully expanded dark-green trifoliate leaves of alfalfa genotype
                        Regen-SY-27 (Bingham, 1991; Austin et al., 1995). Leaf surfaces were sterilized by washing for 30 s in 70% (v/v) ethanol, followed by 90 s in 10% (v/v) household bleach
                        and 0.1% (v/v) Tween 20, and then rinsed three times in sterile, distilled water. We cut off the leaf margins on moist filter
                        paper and placed the remaining explants onto B5 medium (Brown and Atanassov, 1985) with 1.0 mg L−12,4-D and 0.1 mg L−1 kinetin. After 3 to 4 weeks under constant light at room temperature, the explants had callused and many small green pro-embryos
                        were present. At this point we moved the explants onto B5 medium without hormones to allow the pro-embryos to develop. After
                        another 2 to 3 weeks under constant light at room temperature, the embryos had established bilateral symmetry and could be
                        moved to Murashige and Skoog medium (Murashige and Skoog, 1962) to allow the roots and shoots to develop.
                     
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     
                     Antibody Preparation
                     
                     
                        Heck et al. (1995) previously described the production of polyclonal antibodies that recognize AGL15. To ensure specificity of the antiserum
                        for AGL15, the highly conserved MADS domain was removed and the remaining domains of oilseed rape AGL15–1 were overexpressed
                        in Escherichia coli to produce antigen. For protein gel-blot analysis, antibodies that recognized the bacterial antigen were blot-affinity purified
                        from antiserum as described by Tang (1993). The serum that remained after the antigen-coated strips were removed was “immunodepleted” and we used it as the control
                        in several experiments. For immunohistochemistry, immune and preimmune sera were preadsorbed against mature oilseed rape leaf
                        pieces to remove serum components that bind nonspecifically to fixed plant tissues, as described by Perry et al. (1996).
                     
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     
                     Immunodetection on Protein Gel Blots
                     
                     Tissues were flash-frozen in liquid N2 and soluble protein extracts were prepared as described previously (Heck et al., 1995). Proteins in the extracts were separated on denaturing 15% (w/v) polyacrylamide gels before blotting onto Immobilon PVDF
                        membranes (Millipore). Blots were incubated with affinity-purified antibodies (diluted 1:1000 or 1:1500 [v/v] relative to
                        the original immune serum), preimmune serum, or immunodepleted serum. The immunoreactive protein was visualized using the
                        Lumi-GLO system (Kirkegaard and Perry Laboratories, Gaithersburg, MD), with the secondary antibody diluted 1:5000 (v/v). We
                        exposed the blots to x-ray film (Biomax MR, Kodak) for 1 to 3 min.
                     
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     
                     Immunohistochemistry
                     
                     Localization of AGL15 on tissue sections (7 μm) in paraffin embedding medium (Paraplast Plus, Sigma) was performed as described
                        previously (Perry et al., 1996). To prepare figures, we scanned the slides with a film scanner (RFS 2035, Kodak) and assembled the images onto plates using
                        PhotoShop 3.0 (Adobe Systems, Mountain View, CA).
                     
                     
                  
                  
               
               
                  Previous SectionNext Section
                  
                  RESULTS
                  
                  
                     
                     Demonstration of Antibody Specificity
                     
                     We prepared antibodies that were highly specific for AGL15 for use in protein gel-blot analyses and localization experiments.
                        Only the portions of the oilseed rape AGL15–1 gene product downstream of the MADS domain (i.e. the portions that distinguish
                        AGL15 from other members of the MADS-domain family) were used to elicit the immune serum. Antibodies that recognize these
                        portions of AGL15 were subsequently isolated from the immune serum by affinity purification. When the affinity-purified antibodies
                        were used in protein gel-blot analyses, a single major immunoreactive protein with an apparent molecular mass close to that
                        predicted by the nucleotide sequence (30 kD) appeared in the soluble protein extracts prepared from oilseed rape embryos (Fig.
                        1a). Preimmune serum did not recognize this protein, and immune serum that had been immunodepleted by incubating it with excess
                        antigen exhibited a significant reduction in reactivity (Fig. 1a).
                        
                     
                     
                        View larger version:In this window
                                 In a new window
                              Download as PowerPoint Slide
                              
                        
                        Fig. 1. 
                           
                           Specificity of AGL15 immune serum. a, Protein gel blot of soluble protein extracts prepared from developing oilseed rape embryos.
                              Each lane contained 150 μg of protein. Identical strips were incubated with either preimmune serum (PI), affinity-purified
                              antibodies (I), or immunodepleted immune serum (I*). All serum preparations were at the same dilution (1:1000) relative to
                              the original sera. b, Central whorls of a late-stage, pre-anthesis flower from a wild-type Arabidopsis plant treated with
                              AGL15 immune serum. Immunostaining can be detected in association with pollen nuclei at this stage, but is not associated
                              with other nuclei in floral tissues. c, Localization of AGL15 in the central whorls of a late-stage, pre-anthesis flower from
                              a transgenic Arabidopsis plant that is constitutively expressing AGL15. Immunostaining can be detected in association with
                              the nuclei in virtually all cells in the flower. d, Protein gel blot of soluble protein extracts prepared from zygotic embryos
                              (oilseed rape, pea, and maize) or fruits with developing embryos (alfalfa) probed with affinity-purified antibodies that recognize
                              AGL15. Each lane contained 150 μg of protein. an, Anther; ca, carpel; o, ovule; re, receptacle. Bars = 75 μm.
                           
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                     We showed previously that the epitopes recognized by antibodies in the immune serum were associated with the nuclei in the
                        developing embryos of oilseed rape, Arabidopsis, and maize (Perry et al., 1996). When preimmune serum (Perry et al., 1996) or immunodepleted serum (not shown) was used in immunolabeling experiments, no staining was visible. The immune antiserum
                        did not label nuclei in wild-type Arabidopsis flowers (Fig. 1b) or wild-type oilseed rape inflorescence apices (Perry et al., 1996), despite the relative abundance of other MADS-domain proteins in these tissues. This result demonstrates specificity for
                        this family member and also eliminates the possibility that the antibodies recognized proteins that reside permanently in
                        the nucleus. When sections of flowers from transgenic Arabidopsis plants that constitutively overexpressed AGL15 (G.R. Heck,
                        S.E. Perry, S.E. Patterson, and D.E. Fernandez, unpublished data) were labeled, we saw intense, nuclear-associated immunostaining
                        in all cells (Fig. 1c).
                     
                     
                     The affinity-purified AGL15 antibodies also recognized a related set of epitopes in other plant species. One major immunoreactive
                        band was present in the soluble protein extracts prepared from the zygotic embryos of a variety of flowering plants (Fig.
                        1d). In many dicots the immunoreactive protein migrates with a molecular mass similar to that seen in oilseed rape (Heck et al., 1995). In other dicots and in monocots, however, the immunoreactive protein has reduced mobility and larger apparent molecular
                        mass (Fig. 1d). The molecular basis of the mobility shift seen in pea (approximately 2 kD) and maize (approximately 5 kD) embryos is not
                        yet known. In developing alfalfa fruits, we saw two major immunoreactive bands. The larger of these corresponded to the single
                        immunoreactive band in alfalfa zygotic and somatic embryos (Fig. 4f) and was approximately twice the size of the immunoreactive protein in pea. The other immunoreactive protein, which had
                        an apparent molecular mass of approximately 40 kD, was less abundant and may have been associated with maternally derived
                        tissue.
                        
                     
                     
                        View larger version:In this window
                                 In a new window
                              Download as PowerPoint Slide
                              
                        
                        Fig. 4. 
                           
                           Accumulation of AGL15 during somatic embryogenesis. a, Oilseed rape developing microspores in an anther of the appropriate
                              stage for embryo culture probed with anti-AGL15 antiserum. AGL15 is present at low levels in the cytoplasm and nuclei of developing
                              microspores. Bar = 10 μm. b, Unorganized mass produced during oilseed rape anther culture viewed with phase-contrast optics.
                              No organized epidermal layer is apparent. Bar = 50 μm. c, Unorganized mass shown in b viewed with bright-field optics. No
                              nuclear labeling is observed with the AGL15 antiserum. Bar = 50 μm. d, Oilseed rape microspore embryo derived from anther
                              culture probed with anti-AGL15 antiserum. An organized epidermal layer is present, indicating development in an embryonic
                              mode. AGL15 is present at relatively high levels in the nuclei of cells throughout the embryo. Bar = 200 μm. e, Higher-magnification
                              view of the embryo shown in d to show nuclear subcellular localization of AGL15. Bar = 50 μm. f, Protein gel blot of soluble
                              protein extracts from alfalfa leaf explants in a somatic embryo culture system probed with affinity-purified antibodies that
                              recognize AGL15. Each lane contained 125 μg of protein. The major immunoreactive protein band in extracts prepared from mature
                              leaf tissue migrated at approximately 40 kD. Within several DAC, another immunoreactive band appeared that migrated at approximately
                              56 kD. The lower molecular mass gradually disappeared with increasing time in culture. The higher-molecular-mass band appeared
                              gradually and persisted throughout the period of somatic embryogenesis. g, Tissue section of an alfalfa mature leaf probed
                              with anti-AGL15 antiserum. The immunoreactive protein was predominantly associated with the mesophyll cells. Bar = 100 μm.
                              h, Higher-magnification view of the mesophyll cells in the tissue section shown in g. The immunoreactive protein was associated
                              with the cytoplasm. Bar = 50 μm. i, Tissue section of an alfalfa leaf explant 4 DAC probed with anti-AGL15 antiserum. Immunoreactive
                              protein was predominantly associated with the cytoplasm in some cells (arrow) and with nuclei in other cells (arrowheads).
                              Bar = 50 μm. j, Tissue section of an alfalfa leaf explant 7 DAC probed with anti-AGL15 antiserum. The immunoreactive protein
                              was associated exclusively with the nuclei. Bar = 50 μm. k, Tissue section of a somatic embryo derived from alfalfa leaf culture
                              probed with anti-AGL15 antiserum. The immunoreactive protein was associated with nuclei throughout the embryo, including the
                              cotyledons (C) and the axis (A). Bar = 100 μm.
                           
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                     We demonstrated previously that the immunoreactive protein in maize showed the same expression pattern, relative abundance,
                        and cellular localization during zygotic embryogenesis as AGL15 in oilseed rape and Arabidopsis. Based on these data, we concluded
                        that the immunoreactive protein in monocots (despite its altered size) is likely to represent the functional equivalent, if
                        not the true homolog, of AGL15. All of the evidence we have accumulated to date, including the results presented in this paper,
                        is consistent with the conclusions that (a) the immune antiserum recognizes a restricted set of epitopes and (b) the majority
                        of these epitopes are associated with low-abundance proteins whose attributes (e.g. accumulation pattern and cellular localization)
                        suggest a structural and/or functional relationship to AGL15.
                     
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     
                     AGL15-Related Proteins Accumulate in Embryos  That Arise by Apomixis
                     
                     In plant species that reproduce by apomixis, embryo development is not tied to a fertilization event. In diplospory, a type
                        of gametophytic apomixis, the megaspore mother cell does not undergo meiosis normally and there is no reduction in chromosome
                        number (for review, see Koltunow, 1993; Calzada et al., 1996). Mitotic divisions give rise to an embryo sac in which the cells are still diploid. A common apomict of this type is dandelion,
                        in which mitosis of an unreduced but otherwise normal egg gives rise to an embryo that is genetically identical to the mother
                        plant.
                     
                     
                     Sections of developing dandelion seeds were labeled with AGL15 antiserum. As shown in Figure 2a, immunoreactive protein was present in cells constituting the embryo sac before embryo development initiated and in the
                        surrounding ovule tissue. Immunoreactive protein accumulated in the cytoplasm and was excluded from the nuclei of cells in
                        the embryo sac at this stage of development (Fig. 2a). At the eight-cell stage, we could detect immunoreactive protein in both the cytoplasm and nuclei of cells in the embryo
                        (Fig. 2b). At the late-globular stage, immunoreactive protein was predominantly associated with the nuclei of cells and was present
                        in all cell layers and tissue types of the embryo (Fig. 2c). This pattern of accumulation is identical to that previously described for AGL15 in sexually derived embryos (Perry et al., 1996), and was not observed when preimmune serum was used (data not shown).
                        
                     
                     
                        View larger version:In this window
                                 In a new window
                              Download as PowerPoint Slide
                              
                        
                        Fig. 2. 
                           
                           Accumulation of AGL15 during apomixis in dandelion. Tissue sections treated with anti-AGL15 antiserum and visualized by bright-field
                              microscopy are shown. a, Dandelion embryo sac (ES). Immunoreactive protein is present in the cytoplasm of cells in the embryo
                              sac. At this stage of development, immunoreactive protein is excluded from embryo sac nuclei (indicated with arrowheads).
                              Labeling with anti-AGL15 antiserum is also apparent in the surrounding tissues of the seed. Bar = 20 μm. b, Dandelion seed
                              at the eight-cell stage of embryo development. Immunoreactive protein is present in the cytoplasm and nuclei of cells of the
                              preglobular-stage embryo (E). Labeling with anti-AGL15 antiserum is also apparent in other tissues of the seed. c, Dandelion
                              seed at the late-globular stage of embryo development. Immunoreactive protein is associated with nuclei in the embryo (E)
                              and suspensor (S). Lower levels of labeling are present in other seed tissues. Bars = 50 μm.
                           
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     
                     AGL15 Accumulates in Supernumerary Cotyledons Produced at the Shoot Apex
                     
                     We previously showed that Arabidopsis lec1–2 embryos, which prematurely exit the embryonic phase and produce cotyledons with leaf-like traits (Meinke et al., 1994; West et al., 1994), showed a premature loss of AGL15 around the transition stage of development (Perry et al., 1996). Another interesting set of Arabidopsis mutants with regard to changes in organ identity are the extra cotyledons (xtc) mutants such as xtc2, which produce seedlings with one to two supernumerary, cotyledon-like organs (Conway and Poethig, 1997). To determine whether these organs contained elevated levels of AGL15, lateral organs that appeared after germination were
                        harvested from 10- to 12-d-old xtc2seedlings. Because xtc2 seedlings develop more slowly than wild-type Landsberg erecta seedlings, organs isolated fromxtc2 seedlings were not at the same developmental stage as leaves isolated from wild-type seedlings of the same age. To obtain
                        samples that were developmentally equivalent, we took advantage of the incomplete penetrance of the xtc2 mutant.
                     
                     
                     Approximately 30% of the seedlings produced organs that resembled cotyledons. Organs of this type, which have at most one
                        trichome, were collected as “secondary cotyledons.” Another 30% of the seedlings produced only normal-looking leaves, and
                        organs were collected from these seedlings for the leaf sample. The remaining 40% of the seedlings produced organs with a
                        small number of trichomes. We discarded them because we could not reliably assign them to either group (cotyledon or leaf).
                        We probed the blots of soluble protein extracts prepared from the collected organs with anti-AGL15 affinity-purified antibodies.
                        As shown in Figure3a, organs displaying embryonic identity (secondary cotyledons) accumulated higher levels of AGL15 than organs of the same
                        age displaying “nonembryo” or “leaf” identity. We could not detect AGL15 in the soluble protein extracts prepared from the
                        leaves or primary cotyledons of 10-d-old wild-type Landsbergerecta seedlings (data not shown).
                        
                     
                     
                        View larger version:In this window
                                 In a new window
                              Download as PowerPoint Slide
                              
                        
                        Fig. 3. 
                           
                           Accumulation of AGL15 in embryonic organs produced at the shoot apex. a, Protein gel blot of soluble protein extracts prepared
                              from secondary cotyledons (C*) or leaves (L) of 10- to 12-d-old xtc2 Arabidopsis seedlings probed with affinity-purified antibodies that recognize AGL15. Each lane contained 150 μg of protein.
                              AGL15 accumulated to higher levels in the secondary cotyledon sample than in the leaf sample. b, Organs produced at the shoot
                              apex of an oilseed rape embryo excised from the seed at 44 DAP, after several weeks in culture. The first primordium developed
                              into a secondary cotyledon (C*), and the second primordium developed into a leaf (L). The embryonic cotyledons are out of
                              the frame to the right. c, Chimeric organ produced at the shoot apex of an oilseed rape embryo excised at 44 DAP, after several
                              weeks in culture. Large sectors of cotyledon (C*) and leaf (L) tissue are visible. d, Protein gel blot of soluble protein
                              extracts prepared from secondary cotyledons (C*), chimeric organs (Ch), or leaves (L) produced by oilseed rape embryos excised
                              at 47 DAP, cultured for 27 d, and probed with affinity-purified antibodies that recognize AGL15. Each lane contained 150 μg
                              of soluble protein. The level of accumulation of AGL15 is approximately proportional to the amount of cotyledon tissue present
                              in the sample.
                           
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                     Precociously germinating oilseed rape embryos also produce new lateral organs that take on a cotyledon identity (Finkelstein and Crouch, 1984;Fernandez, 1997). As shown in Figure 3, b and c, when immature oilseed rape embryos were excised from late-maturation-stage seed (44–47 DAP) and placed into culture,
                        three different types of organs were produced at the shoot apex. Typically, the first primordium developed into an extra cotyledon
                        and the second primordium into a leaf (Fig. 3b), but primordia occasionally gave rise to chimeric organs with large sectors of cotyledon and leaf tissue (Fig. 3c). We collected the organs from precociously germinating embryos 27 DAC and sorted them into different types (secondary cotyledon,
                        leaf, and chimeric organ).
                     
                     
                     We probed the blots of soluble protein extracts prepared from these three samples with affinity-purified anti-AGL15 antibodies.
                        AGL15 accumulated to relatively high levels in the secondary cotyledons (Fig.3d). An additional, more diffuse immunoreactive band showing reduced mobility (equivalent to a molecular mass difference of
                        approximately 7 kD) was also visible in this sample. AGL15 accumulated at lower levels in the chimeric organs (Fig. 3d). The leaves did not accumulate detectable amounts of AGL15 (Fig. 3d). Therefore, the amount of AGL15 in each sample varied according to the amount of embryonic tissue in that organ type.
                     
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     
                     AGL15-Related Proteins Accumulate in Embryos  That Arise from Somatic Tissue
                     
                     Plants have the unique ability to produce embryos from somatic cells (for review, see Zimmerman, 1993). Somatic embryogenesis occurs in many species and from both diploid and haploid progenitor cells. One well-developed system
                        in which embryos arise from cells that have undergone meiosis involves culture of excised anthers or isolated microspores
                        (for review, see Touraev et al., 1997). Oilseed-rape microspores will develop into haploid embryos instead of pollen grains if environmental stress is applied,
                        usually in the form of heat shock (Crouch, 1982; Touraev et al., 1997). As shown in Figure4a, microspores developing inside an excised anther accumulated low levels of AGL15. When whole anthers were used for microspore
                        embryogenesis, embryos were produced at a low frequency, along with pollen and unorganized masses. One such unorganized structure
                        obtained by anther culture appears in Figure 4b. When sections of this unorganized structure were labeled with AGL15 antiserum, we observed no nuclear staining (Fig. 4c). Other structures had a distinct epidermal layer, reflecting development in a more organized, embryogenic mode. One such
                        structure, shown in Figure 4, d and e, showed strong nuclear labeling with AGL15 antiserum. Mature pollen derived from either normal development or development
                        in culture did not show labeling with the AGL15 antiserum (data not shown).
                     
                     
                     In some cases mature vegetative organs can also give rise to embryos. In alfalfa, somatic embryos are produced from explants
                        taken from mature, fully expanded trifoliate leaves (Austin et al., 1995). When these explants are placed onto a culture medium with hormones, they develop into loosely adhering calli (unorganized
                        masses) with small, green pro-embryos within 3 to 4 weeks. The embryos will mature if they are removed to a medium without
                        hormones, and they can eventually grow into mature plants.
                     
                     
                     We examined the status of AGL15-related proteins in samples collected at various times after the start of culture in the alfalfa
                        somatic embryogenesis system. As shown in Figure 4f, an immunoreactive protein band of approximately 40 kD was present in the excised leaf material. The level of accumulation
                        (on a per-milligram-of-protein basis) was comparable to that seen for AGL15 protein in oilseed rape embryos: the protein accumulated
                        at the upper end of the scale for AGL15 but was still a low-abundance protein. The 40-kD protein was the predominant immunoreactive
                        protein during the first 2 d in culture. By 3 DAC, the levels of the 40-kD protein had started to decline, and an additional
                        immunoreactive protein with an apparent molecular mass of 56-to-60 kD could be detected (Fig. 4f). By 6 DAC the 56- to 60-kD form had become the predominant form, and by 8 DAC, when the leaf pieces had started to callus,
                        the immunoreactive protein band at 40 kD had largely disappeared (Fig. 4f). The 56- to 60-kD protein was the predominant immunoreactive species for the rest of the culture period (Fig. 4f) and was the only form that could be detected in zygotic and somatic embryos (not shown). When we examined seedlings regenerated
                        from somatic embryos, approximately equal quantities of both forms of immunoreactive protein were present (not shown).
                     
                     
                     Using immunohistochemistry, we examined the subcellular localization of the immunoreactive protein(s) in this system. In the
                        mesophyll cells in mature leaf tissues, it was present predominantly in the cytoplasm (Fig. 4, g and h). At 4 DAC immunoreactive protein was predominantly nuclear in portions of the explant but remained cytoplasmic
                        in other cells (Fig. 4i). By 7 DAC, however, immunoreactive protein was associated with the nuclei in all of the cells in the explant (Fig.4j). At subsequent times (data not shown) and in somatic embryos (Fig.4k), the immunoreactive protein was exclusively nuclear. Therefore, the change in forms from 40 to between 56 and 60 kD occurred
                        during the same period as the change in subcellular localization from cytoplasmic to nuclear, and it preceded the appearance
                        of embryos in this culture system.
                     
                     
                  
                  
               
               
                  Previous SectionNext Section
                  
                  DISCUSSION
                  
                  
                     
                     Embryonic Tissues Accumulate AGL15 or  AGL15-Related Proteins
                     
                     We reported previously that AGL15 accumulated at its highest levels in the products of double fertilization (the embryo, suspensor,
                        and endosperm) following sexual reproduction in angiosperms and was maintained at high levels in immature embryos (Perry et al., 1996). If AGL15 is important for development in an embryonic mode, as this pattern of accumulation might suggest, we would also
                        expect to find relatively high levels of AGL15 or AGL15-related proteins in developmental contexts where embryos or organs
                        with embryonic tissue arise outside of the seed or by means other than fertilization of the egg. We have used AGL15-specific
                        antibodies to examine developmental situations of this type in a variety of flowering plants. In every case, whenever embryos
                        or embryonic organs were present, relatively high levels of AGL15-related proteins could be detected as well.
                     
                     
                     The results of our study of dandelion embryos indicate that the absence of a fertilization event does not preclude accumulation
                        of AGL15. In dandelion, embryos arise via apomixis, which is a form of asexual reproduction. AGL15-related protein accumulates
                        in the same pattern in these asexual embryos as it does in zygotic embryos that arise following a fertilization event (Perry et al., 1996).
                     
                     
                     The results of our study of the xtc2 mutant of Arabidopsis indicate that AGL15 accumulates in organs with embryonic features (i.e. cotyledons) even if they initiate
                        during later stages of embryogeny and develop largely after germination. In the xtc2 mutant of Arabidopsis, secondary cotyledons appear as a result of changes in the relative timing of embryo and shoot apex
                        development (Conway and Poethig, 1997). xtc2 embryo development is delayed, but shoot apex development initiates precociously. Maturation-stagextc2 embryos are at the late-heart to early-torpedo stage of development in terms of morphogenesis but have large primordia at
                        the shoot apex (Conway and Poethig, 1997). We found that AGL15 accumulated to higher levels in the secondary cotyledons that developed from these primordia than in
                        leaves of the same age.
                     
                     
                     The results of our study of organs produced during precocious germination in oilseed rape indicate that AGL15 also accumulates
                        in cotyledons that are initiated outside of the seed environment. When immature oilseed rape embryos were excised and placed
                        into culture, they produced three different kinds of organs: secondary cotyledons, leaves, and chimeric organs, with large
                        sectors of cotyledon and leaf tissue (Finkelstein and Crouch, 1984; Fernandez, 1997). The amount of AGL15 present in these organs was directly proportional to the amount of cotyledon tissue present, despite
                        the fact that these organs initiated after the maternal tissues were removed and often after an extended period in culture.
                     
                     
                     Finally, the results of our studies of somatic embryogenesis indicate that AGL15 accumulates even when embryos arise de novo
                        from cells in other phases of the life cycle. Immature oilseed rape microspores can be induced to develop into pollen, calli,
                        or embryos. AGL15 was undetectable in the nuclei of fully mature pollen and in the cells in unorganized masses. Only the cells
                        that took on an embryonic identity accumulated higher levels of AGL15. The accumulation pattern of AGL15-related proteins
                        was even more interesting in alfalfa, where embryos were obtained by culturing mature leaf tissue. Immunoreactive protein
                        was present at relatively high levels in the leaf mesophyll cells of alfalfa.
                     
                     
                     Detectable amounts of AGL15-related proteins did not accumulate in the mature leaf tissues of oilseed rape, Arabidopsis (Heck et al., 1995;Perry et al., 1996; and S.E. Perry, personal observation), tomato (M.D. Lehti, personal observation), or maize (S.-C. Fang, personal observation);
                        however, they did accumulate in the mature leaf tissues of pea, another legume (M.D. Lehti, personal observation). Does the
                        accumulation of AGL15-related protein at high levels somehow enhance the embryogenic potential of alfalfa leaf cells? AGL15
                        accumulation did not appear to be sufficient to confer an embryonic identity on a cell or cells: the floral organs of plants
                        overexpressing AGL15 accumulated AGL15 (Fig. 1c) but maintained their identity as reproductive tissues. However, AGL15 may be necessary to either direct or support development
                        in an embryonic mode. The fact that immature oilseed rape microspores accumulated low but detectable amounts of AGL15 and
                        also had embryogenic potential that can be expressed in culture may be significant in this regard.
                     
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     
                     Developmental Regulation of Localization of AGL15
                     
                     In every situation in which embryogenesis was newly initiated, we have seen a change in the localization of AGL15 or AGL15-related
                        protein. We demonstrated previously that localization of AGL15 was developmentally regulated in zygotic embryos of oilseed
                        rape (Perry et al., 1996) and found that a similar change in subcellular localization, from cytoplasmically associated to nuclear associated, occurred
                        at the start of embryogenesis in the asexual embryos of dandelion. Therefore, the change in epitope localization does not
                        appear to be tied in any obligatory way to a fertilization event. The maternal environment also appears to be dispensable.
                        In the alfalfa somatic embryo culture system, immunoreactive protein was initially present in the cytoplasm of leaf mesophyll
                        cells and became exclusively localized in the nuclei even before somatic embryo development was apparent. These results indicate
                        that the change in the localization of AGL15-related proteins is not dependent on information from maternal tissues of the
                        seed.
                     
                     
                     The importance of subcellular localization as a mechanism for regulation of transcription factors is increasingly being recognized
                        (for review, see Calkhoven and Ab, 1996; Jans and Hübner, 1996;Vandromme et al., 1996). In addition to AGL15, there are other plant MADS-domain proteins that show differential localization. In snapdragon, DEFH125
                        was present in the cytoplasm in the vegetative cell of pollen grains but was present in the nuclei of cells in the transmitting
                        tissue of the upper portion of the style after pollination (Zachgo et al., 1997). Regulation of localization may be tied to heterodimer formation in the case of the Arabidopsis MADS-domain proteins AP3
                        (APETALA3) and PI (PISTILLATA). In plants that ectopically express AP3 protein fused to the reporter GUS, GUS activity was
                        confined to the cytoplasm unless the appropriate partner (PI in this case) was also present (McGonigle et al., 1996). Similarly, fusions between PI and GUS were cytoplasmically localized unless AP3 was present (McGonigle et al., 1996). Unlike AP3-PI, AGL15 could bind DNA as a homodimer in vitro (Perry et al., 1996). Therefore, the formation of a heterodimer between AGL15 and another MADS-domain protein may not be a prerequisite for nuclear
                        import.
                     
                     
                     In the alfalfa somatic embryo system, the developmentally regulated change in subcellular localization of AGL15-related epitopes
                        coincided with a change in the apparent molecular mass from 40 kD to between 56 and 60 kD. Although it is possible that the
                        major immunoreactive protein bands represent proteins that are unrelated to AGL15, we consider this unlikely, based on the
                        high degree of specificity that the antibodies displayed and the correspondence between the abundance, expression pattern,
                        and localization of the immunoreactive proteins in alfalfa and those of AGL15 in other species. Alfalfa had two very distinct
                        forms of AGL15-related proteins that were both present during the period when vegetative tissue (leaf) was making a transition
                        to embryogenesis. It is intriguing that precociously germinating oilseed rape embryos, which were also in a state of developmental
                        transition, contained two forms of immunoreactive protein as well (Fig. 3d).
                     
                     
                     In alfalfa, the shift in molecular mass was coincident with and may reflect a regulatory event that was tied to the change
                        in subcellular localization. This shift could involve degradation of the cytoplasmic form and synthesis of a new nuclear form,
                        possibly via alternate splicing to generate a new transcript. Alternatively, the cytoplasmic form may be posttranslationally
                        modified in some way. Possible posttranslational modifications include dimerization, phosphorylation, glycosylation, and/or
                        attachment of ubiquitin-like proteins (Calkhoven and Ab, 1996; Jans and Hübner, 1996; Vandromme et al., 1996;Haltiwanger et al., 1997; Johnson and Hochstrasser, 1997). We will be investigating these and other possibilities in future studies to determine the basis of the change in molecular
                        mass in both alfalfa and oilseed rape and its relationship to subcellular localization.
                     
                     
                     In summary, we have shown that AGL15 or AGL15-related proteins accumulated at higher levels in the nuclei whenever a set of
                        cells developed in an embryonic mode, regardless of their origin or the particular developmental situation. The fact that
                        nuclear-associated forms of immunoreactive protein appeared at early stages as a result of a developmentally regulated process
                        supports the idea that these proteins play an important role at the beginning of embryogenesis. Future experiments will be
                        aimed at more thoroughly defining that role and the contribution that AGL15 and AGL15-related proteins make to the establishment
                        of the new sporophytic generation.
                     
                     
                  
                  
               
               
                  Previous SectionNext Section
                  
                  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
                  
                  We thank Su-Chiung Fang and Talila Golan for critical reading of the manuscript. We also thank Dr. R. Scott Poethig for xtc2seed, and Dr. Sandra Austin-Phillips and Jessica Will for alfalfa tissue and for help with the alfalfa somatic embryogenesis
                     system.
                  
                  
               
               
                  Previous SectionNext Section
                  Footnotes
                  
                        
                        ↵1 This research was supported by grants to the University of Wisconsin from the U.S. Department of Energy/National Science
                           Foundation/U.S. Department of Agriculture Collaborative Program on Research in Plant Biology (no. BIR 92-20331), by the National
                           Science Foundation (grant no. BIR-9403929 to S.E.P.), and by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (grant no. 9602636 to D.E.F.).
                           M.D.L. was supported in part by a National Institutes of Health training fellowship (no. NIH-5-T32-GM08349).
                        
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        ↵2 Present address: Department of Agronomy, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40546–0091.
                        
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                        ↵* Corresponding author; e-mail dfernand{at}facstaff.wisc.edu; fax 1–608–262–7509.
                        
                        
                     
                  
               
                  
                  Abbreviations:
                  
                  DAP
                     days after pollination
                     DAC
                     days after the start of culture
                  
               Received November 4, 1998.
                  
                  Accepted February 10, 1999.
                  
               
                  Previous Section 
                  
                  LITERATURE  CITED
                  ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Austin  S, 
                                 
                                 Bingham  ET, 
                                 
                                 Mathews  DE, 
                                 
                                 Shahan  MN, 
                                 
                                 Will  J, 
                                 
                                 Burgess  RR
                               (1995) Production and field performance of transgenic alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.) expressing alpha-amylase and manganese-dependent lignin peroxidase. Euphytica 85:381–393.
                           CrossRefWeb of Science
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Berleth  T
                               (1998) Experimental approaches to Arabidopsis embryogenesis. Plant Physiol Biochem 36:69–82.
                           
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Bingham  ET
                               (1991) Registration of alfalfa hybrid Regen-SY germplasm for tissue culture and transformation research. Crop Sci 31:1098.
                           Web of Science
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Brown  DC, 
                                 
                                 Atanassov  A
                               (1985) Role of genetic background in somatic embryogenesis in Medicago. Plant Cell Tissue Organ Cult 4:107–114.
                           
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Calkhoven  CF, 
                                 
                                 Ab  G
                               (1996) Multiple steps in the regulation of transcription-factor level and activity. Biochem J 317:329–342.
                           
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Calzada  J-PV, 
                                 
                                 Crane  CF, 
                                 
                                 Stelly  DM
                               (1996) Apomixis: the asexual revolution. Science 274:1322–1323.
                           FREE Full Text
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Conway  LJ, 
                                 
                                 Poethig  RS
                               (1997) Mutations of Arabidopsis thaliana that transform leaves into cotyledons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:10209–10214.
                           Abstract/FREE Full Text
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Crouch  ML
                               (1982) Non-zygotic embryos of Brassica napus L. contain embryo-specific storage proteins. Planta 156:520–524.
                           CrossRef
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Fernandez  DE
                               (1997) Developmental basis of homeosis in precociously germinating Brassica napus embryos: phase change at the shoot apex. Development 124:1149–1157.
                           Abstract
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Finkelstein  RR, 
                                 
                                 Crouch  ML
                               (1984) Precociously germinating rapeseed embryos retain characteristics of embryogeny. Planta 162:125–131.
                           
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Haltiwanger  RS, 
                                 
                                 Busby  S, 
                                 
                                 Grove  K, 
                                 
                                 Li  S, 
                                 
                                 Mason  D, 
                                 
                                 Medina  L, 
                                 
                                 Moloney  D, 
                                 
                                 Philipsberg  G, 
                                 
                                 Scartozzi  R
                               (1997) O-glycosylation of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins: regulation analogous to phosphorylation? Biochem Biophys Res Commun 231:237–242.
                           CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Heck  GR, 
                                 
                                 Perry  SE, 
                                 
                                 Nichols  KW, 
                                 
                                 Fernandez  DE
                               (1995) AGL15, a MADS-domain protein expressed in developing embryos. Plant Cell 7:1271–1282.
                           Abstract/FREE Full Text
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Jans  DA, 
                                 
                                 Hübner  S
                               (1996) Regulation of protein transport to the nucleus: central role of phosphorylation. Physiol Rev 76:651–685.
                           Abstract/FREE Full Text
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Johnson  PR, 
                                 
                                 Hochstrasser  M
                               (1997) SUMO-1: ubiquitin gains weight. Trends Cell Biol 7:408–413.
                           CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Koltunow  AM
                               (1993) Apomixis: embryo sacs and embryos formed without meiosis or fertilization in ovules. Plant Cell 5:1425–1437.
                           FREE Full Text
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Li  ZS, 
                                 
                                 Thomas  TL
                               (1998) PEI1, an embryo-specific zinc finger protein gene required for heart-stage embryo formation in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 10:383–398.
                           Abstract/FREE Full Text
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Lotan  T, 
                                 
                                 Ohto  M, 
                                 
                                 Yee  KM, 
                                 
                                 West  MAL, 
                                 
                                 Lo  R, 
                                 
                                 Kwong  RW, 
                                 
                                 Yamagishi  K, 
                                 
                                 Fischer  RL, 
                                 
                                 Goldberg  RB, 
                                 
                                 Harada  JJ
                               (1998) Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON1 is sufficient to induce embryo development in vegetative cells. Cell 93:1195–1205.
                           CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Luerssen  H, 
                                 
                                 Kirik  V, 
                                 
                                 Herrmann  P, 
                                 
                                 Miséra  S
                               (1998) FUSCA3 encodes a protein with a conserved VP1/ABI3-like B3 domain which is of functional importance for the regulation of seed maturation
                                    in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 15:755–764.
                           CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              McGonigle  B, 
                                 
                                 Bouhidel  K, 
                                 
                                 Irish  VF
                               (1996) Nuclear localization of the Arabidopsis APETALA3 and PISTILLATA homeotic gene products depends on their simultaneous expression. Genes Dev 10:1812–1821.
                           Abstract/FREE Full Text
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Meinke  DW, 
                                 
                                 Franzmann  LH, 
                                 
                                 Nickle  TC, 
                                 
                                 Yeung  EC
                               (1994) Leafy cotyledon mutants of Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 6:1049–1064.
                           Abstract/FREE Full Text
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Monnier  M
                               (1976) Culture in vitro de l'embryon immature de Capsella bursa pastoris Moench (L.). Rev Cytol Biol Veg 39:1–120.
                           
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Mordhorst  AP, 
                                 
                                 Toonen  MAJ, 
                                 
                                 de Vries  SC
                               (1997) Plant embryogenesis. Crit Rev Plant Sci 16:535–576.
                           
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Münster  T, 
                                 
                                 Pahnke  J, 
                                 
                                 Rosa  AD, 
                                 
                                 Kim  JT, 
                                 
                                 Martin  W, 
                                 
                                 Saedler  H, 
                                 
                                 Theissen  G
                               (1997) Floral homeotic genes were recruited from homologous MADS-box genes preexisting in the common ancestor of ferns and seed plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:2415–2420.
                           Abstract/FREE Full Text
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Murashige  T, 
                                 
                                 Skoog  F
                               (1962) A revised medium for rapid growth and bioassays with tobacco tissue cultures. Physiol Plant 15:473–497.
                           CrossRefWeb of Science
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Perry  SE, 
                                 
                                 Nichols  KW, 
                                 
                                 Fernandez  DE
                               (1996) The MADS domain protein AGL15 localizes to the nucleus during early stages of seed development. Plant Cell 8:1977–1989.
                           Abstract/FREE Full Text
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Riechmann  JL, 
                                 
                                 Meyerowitz  EM
                               (1997) MADS domain proteins in plant development. Biol Chem 378:1079–1101.
                           CrossRef
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Rounsley  SD, 
                                 
                                 Ditta  GS, 
                                 
                                 Yanofsky  MF
                               (1995) Diverse roles for MADS box genes in Arabidopsis development. Plant Cell 7:1259–1269.
                           Abstract/FREE Full Text
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           Tang W-JY (1993) Blot-affinity purification of antibodies.In DJ Asai, ed, Methods in Cell Biology, Vol 37. Academic Press, New York, pp 95–104
                           
                           
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Touraev  A, 
                                 
                                 Vicente  O, 
                                 
                                 Heberle-Bors  E
                               (1997) Initiation of microspore embryogenesis by stress. Trends Plant Sci 8:297–302.
                           CrossRef
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Vandromme  M, 
                                 
                                 Gauthier-Rouvière  C, 
                                 
                                 Lamb  N, 
                                 
                                 Fernandez  A
                               (1996) Regulation of transcription factor localization: fine-tuning  of gene expression. Trends Biochem Sci 21:59–64.
                           CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              West  MAL, 
                                 
                                 Yee  KM, 
                                 
                                 Danao  J, 
                                 
                                 Zimmerman  JL, 
                                 
                                 Fischer  RL, 
                                 
                                 Goldberg  RB, 
                                 
                                 Harada  JJ
                               (1994) LEAFY COTYLEDON1 is an essential regulator of late embryogenesis and cotyledon identity in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 6:1731–1745.
                           Abstract/FREE Full Text
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Zachgo  S, 
                                 
                                 Saedler  H, 
                                 
                                 Schwarz-Sommer  Z
                               (1997) Pollenspecific expression of DEFH125, a MADS-box transcription factor in Antirrhinum with unusual features. Plant J 11:1043–1050.
                           CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science
                        
                        
                     
                     ↵
                        
                        
                           
                              Zimmerman  JL
                               (1993) Somatic embryogenesis: a model for early development in higher plants. Plant Cell 5:1411–1423.
                           FREE Full Text
                        
                        
                     
                  
  
