Bordetella bronchiseptica RB50
Description
Bordetella. This group of organisms is capable of invading the respiratory tract of animals and causing severe diseases. They express a number of virulence factors in order to do this including filamentous hemagglutinins for attachment, cytotoxins, and proteins that form a type III secretion system for transport of effector molecules into host cells.
Description
Bordetella bronchiseptica strain RB50. This organism, which is one of the few Bordetella that is capable of persisting in the environment, is rarely found in humans and is often associated with animals. This strain was isolated from a rabbit. The genome contains a type IV pilus biosynthetic operon that produces pili for attachment. The chromosome also contains the gene for pertussis toxin but it is not expressed.

Bordetella petrii DSM 12804
Description
Bordetella petrii strain DSM12804. Bordetella petrii strain DSM12804 was initially isolated from river sediment. Unlike other members of the genus, this organism is not known to be associated with humans or other warm-blooded animals. Bordetella petrii also differs from other Bordetella species in that it is a facultative anaerobe. This strain is the type strain for the species and will be used for comparative genomics with other Bordetella species.

Borrelia burgdorferi B31
Description
Borrelia burgdorferi. This organism is the causative agent of Lyme disease, a multisystemic disease that is considered to be the most prevalent tick-born disease in North America and Europe. This organism was isolated from Ixodes scapularis in 1982. The bacterium is a microaerophilic spirochete that contains seven periplasmic flagella per cell end. Motility is by rapid rotation around the long axis, flexation of the cell and locomotion along a helical path. The most distinctive property is the presence of periplasmic flagella wound around the helical protoplasmic cylinder and encased in an outer sheath. B. burgdorferi has an unusual genome, which includes a linear chromosome and numerous circular plasmids, in some cases containing up to 20 different plasmids.
Description
Borrelia burgdorferi strain B31. This is the type strain (ATCC 35210) for this organism and was derived by limited dilutional cloning from the original Lyme-disease tick isolate derived by A. Barbour.

Borrelia hermsii DAH
Description
Borrelia hermsii strain DAH. This strain was isolated from a case of relapsing fever in western Washington. Borrelia hermsii is the causative agent of tick-borne relapsing fever in the western United States and Canada. Ticks become infected with Borrelia spp. while feeding on an infected mammal, usually a rodent or squirrel. Borrelia then multiplies rapidly, causing a generalized infection throughout the tick. While feeding, the tick passes the organism into a mammalian host through its infectious saliva. Humans become exposed to the infected ticks through contact with rodents or rodent nests. Relapsing fever is characterized by a period of chills, fever, headache, and malaise, an asymptomatic period, followed by another episode of symptoms. This cycle of relapsing is due to changes in the surface proteins of Borrelia, which allow it to avoid detection and removal by the host immune system. This antigenic variation is the result of homologous recombination of silent proteins into an expressed locus, causing partial or complete replacement of one serotype with another.


Borrelia turicatae 91E135
Description
Borrelia turicatae. Borrelia turicatae is the causative agent of tick-borne relapsing fever in the southwestern United States. Ticks become infected with Borrelia while feeding on an infected mammal, usually a rodent or squirrel. Borrelia then multiplies rapidly, causing a generalized infection throughout the tick. While feeding, the tick passes the spirochete into a mammalian host through its infectious saliva. Humans become exposed to the infected ticks through contact with rodents or rodent nests. Relapsing fever is characterized by period of chills, fever, headache, and malaise, followed by an asymptomatic, followed by another episode of symptoms. The cycle of relapsing is due to changes in the surface proteins of Borrelia, which allow it to avoid detection and removal by the host immune system. This antigenic variation is the result of homologous recombination of silent proteins into an expressed locus, causing partial or complete replacement of one serotype with another.
Description
Borrelia turicatae 91E135. This strain was isolated in the United States from the soft tick Ornithodoros turicatae and will be used for comparative analysis.

Bradyrhizobium sp. BTAi1
Description
Bradyrhizobium sp. BTAi 1. This organism is a photosynthetic rhizobium that is also capable of nitrogen-fixation, the first such example of such an organism. It can form nodules on the legume Aeschynomene indica and was isolated from this plant at the Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research in Ithaca, NY. It can form stem and root nodules. The photosynthetic reaction centers are similar to those found in purple photosynthetic bacteria and this microbe aids the plant in carbon metabolism and nitrogen metabolism.

Bradyrhizobium sp. ORS278
Description
Bradyrhizobium sp. ORS278. This strain was isolated from an Aeschynomene stem nodule and is photosynthetic, which is a rare trait in Rhizobium bacteria. These strains exhibit a photoheterotrophic and strictly aerobic photosynthesis. In culture, most stem isolates show the same pink coloration, while a few strains produce orange pigmentation. Pigment analyses showed that bacteriochlorophyll and spirilloxanthin, two pigments of the light harvesting system, are common to all of these photosynthetic Bradyrhizobium strains, whereas orange strains produce an additional bicyclic carotenoid, canthaxanthin (4,4'-diketo-beta-carotene). Bradyrhizobium sp. strain ORS278 produces the highest quantity of canthaxanthin of all tested photosynthetic bacteria; canthaxanthin represents 85% of its total carotenoid content.

Burkholderia multivorans ATCC 17616
Burkholderia species have tremendous versatility: they can efficiently degrade pollutants in water and soil, fix atmospheric nitrogen, or help plants fight against their pathogens; hence they contribute to a healthy, CO2-fixing ecosystem. Burkholderia also occupy diverse habitats from soil to rhizosphere (root zone) to water to intimate associations with plants and animals, even living intracellularly in amoebas, for example. They have among the largest prokaryote genomes (7 to 9.7 Mb), consisting of three replicons, the smaller two exhibiting a faster evolutionary rate and considerable plasticity. This rather unique genome structure is thought to contribute to Burkholderia's characterization as a "versaphile".
Thus far, the members of the Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc) and the narrow group of Burkholderia pathogens outside the Bcc have been sequenced. This selection gives a very narrow insight into the genomics of the genus. Most of the Burkholderia in nature are non-pathogenic, probably are not members of the Bcc, and probably live in the rhizosphere of plants. This project logically extends Burkholderia genomics in two significant ways: by gaining genomic insight into environmentally important members outside the Bcc and pathogen groups, and by helping elucidate what traits are important to rhizosphere competence and plant benefit. Burkholderia are major nitrogen fixing associates of plants in the two largest CO2-sequestering ecosystems in the western hemisphere, the Amazon rainforest and the Cerrado (Brazilian savannah). These soil-microbe-plant communities are the functional unit of an ecosystem, not the plant in isolation. Of the three species to be sequenced for this project, one was isolated from the Amazon rain forest, one comes from the Cerrado, and one is the type strain of grass root colonizers.

Candidatus Amoebophilus asiaticus 5a2
Symbiosis is a tremendously creative force in evolution, and bacteria in particular are critical partners with eukaryotes. The processes and interactions underlying and shaping symbiotic associations are, however, still poorly known. This project will make it possible to determine molecular interaction mechanisms between the two investigated Bacteroidetes symbionts and their respective host cells, and to compare these to mechanisms found in other intracellular bacteria. This will ultimately yield novel insights into the evolution of the intracellular lifestyle and the adaptation of bacteria to different eukaryotic hosts.

Caulobacter sp. K31
Caulobacter strain K31 is a stalked bacterium isolated from low temperature, chlorophenol-contaminated groundwater that may shed light on new mechanisms for biological chlorophenol degradation and bioremediation.
Caulobacter strain K31 was isolated in an enrichment culture for chlorophenol-tolerant bacteria in groundwater from Karkola, Finland, which percolates through nutrient-poor silt and clay, and is cold (7-8oC), oxygen-deficient, iron-rich, and mildly acidic (pH 6-6.5). The aquifer had been contaminated with high levels of chlorophenols for decades by a sawmill using polychlorophenol as a fungicide for lumber treatment. Genomic analysis of Caulobacter K31 may shed light on microbial chlorophenol metabolism and adaptations to subsurface aquatic niches, which may be useful in designing bioremediation strategies talked bacteria of the Caulobacter family are ubiquitous in low nutrient aquatic habitats, particularly in biofilms. The polar stalk enhances nutrient uptake, while the holdfast organelle at the tip of the stalk anchors cells to substrates. Comparative analysis of nutrient acquisition, polar organelle development, and biofilm formation in strain K31, the freshwater strain Caulobacter crescentus, and the marine strain Maricaulis maris (also sequenced at JGI) will shed light on these features, while revealing adaptations to each niche. These include (for example) a novel pathway for D-xylose metabolism shared by K31 and C. crescentus, but absent in M. maris.

Chloroflexus aurantiacus J-10-fl

Cfl. aurantiacus is a filamentous gliding phototroph. It is a thermophile forming massive accumulations as conspicuous mats in neutral to alkaline hot springs. Chloroflexus is found at higher temperatures than any other anoxygenic phototroph. Its optimal growth temperature lies between 50 and 60 degrees C in laboratory cultures. It is typically found as the lower layer of a microbial mat with cyanobacteria growing in layers above it. In springs high in sulfide, however, Chloroflexus may be found alone.
Chloroflexus grows primarily as a photoheterotroph and appears to consume the organic products of the autotrophic cyanobacteria in its native habitat. Some strains can grow autotrophically, however, using hydrogen or sulfide as an electron donor. The CO2 fixation mechanism, the 3-hydroxypropionate pathway, is unique among all phototrophs. Cells appear to lack ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase activity. The light-harvesting apparatus consists of chlorosomes appressed to the cell membrane. The chlorosomes are somewhat smaller that those of the green sulfur bacteria. The chlorosomes contain the accessory bacteriochlorophyll c. Light-harvesting complexes containing Bchl a similar to those of the purple bacteria are located in the cell membrane. The pheophytin-quinone type photochemical reaction centers are also similar to those of the purple bacteria. The cells, however, lack internal membranes typical of the purple bacteria.
Cfl. aurantiacus is found along with several related anoxygenic filamentous phototrophs in the green non-sulfur bacterial (GNSB) branch of the 16S rRNA tree of life. The name of this branch is an unfortunate descriptor because it suggests that all members are green and do not use sulfide, both of which are not true. The diversity of the Chloroflexus relatives contributes to the intrigue about the origins and evolution of photosynthesis. Another species of Chloroflexus, has recently been described, Cfl. aggregans, which is also found in hot spring mats. More distantly related is the recently described freshwater mesophile, Oscillochloris trichoides. O. trichoides is a gliding filament, but differs from Chloroflexus in habitat, being found in sulfide-containing sediments in springs and lakes. It also differs from Chloroflexus by fixing CO2 with ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase via the Calvin cycle. Marine Chloroflexus-like organisms have also been described from marine and hypersaline microbial mats. The planktonic Chloronema is found in the anoxic zones of freshwater lakes. Perhaps most striking, however, is the presence of at least two species of "red" filamentous phototrophs in this branch that lack chlorosomes and contain only bacteriochlorophyll a. Heliothrix oregonensis and "Roseiflexus castenholzii" have been found in hot springs along with Chloroflexus.


Understanding the molecular virulence mechanisms of a bacterium which is pathogenic for fish
An understanding of the molecular mechanisms which confer an aptitude for colonization, invasiveness, and reorientation of the physiology of a host constitutes a challenge of major importance, from academic, medical and agronomic points of view: these studies serve to guide the conception of new strategies for fighting pathogenic organisms.
The genus Flavobacterium includes a large diversity of species, principally isolated from aquatic environments. These species include notably three which are pathogenic for fish: F. psychrophilum, F. columnare and F. branchiophilum. The genome of the JIP 02/86 strain of the bacterium F. psychrophilum which is pathogenic for the salmonides has been already sequenced and analyzed (Duchaud E.)
Whereas F. columnare and F. psychrophilum are sometimes capable of causing branchial lesions in several species of fish, a third species, F. branchiophilum, is mainly responsible for gill disease (Kimura et al., and Wakabayashi H. et al.), a pathology which primarily affects salmonides. Since the first description of this bacterium in Japan, F. branchiophilum has been detected in numerous regions in which salmoniculture is practiced (USA, Hungary, Canada, Korea).
In contrast to F. psychrophilum and F. columnare, F. branchiophilum is considered to be a non-invasive bacterium. The branchial tropism is probably linked to proteolytic and hemagglutinating activities of extracellular products as well as to the adherence capacities of the bacterium, which affects the respiratory capacity of the colonized hosts (Wakabayashi, H., and Iwado, T.).

The tropical bacterium which threatens sugar cane crops
Introduction
The bacterium Xanthomonas albilineans is the agent responsible for a serious disease of sugar cane called leaf scald disease. The symptoms of the disease vary from a simple white line on the leaves to the death of the plant, via bleaching and necrosis of the leaves. X. albilineans is a problem in over 60 tropical countries which produce sugar cane. It causes yield losses in both the field and the factory (reduction of the quantity and quality of the juice extracted from the sugar cane), as well as indirect losses. Its capacity to destroy whole crops in a few months has made it necessary to produce resistant varieties of sugar cane before they can be exploited for the production of sugar or its by-products such as rum and ethanol. In Brazil, ethanol is important as a bio-carburant in automobiles. In addition to its food value, sugar cane is also a major new source of natural and renewable energy, which is important to preserve.
Description
Xanthomonas albilineans is a rod-shaped, Gram-negative and aerobic bacterium. It is motile with a single polar flagellum. Under natural conditions, it only attacks sugar cane (26 million hectares cultivated in the world). Why does X. albilineans have a preference for colonizing the sweet stems produced by this plant? This bacterium is also unusual in that it apparently does not possess avirulence (avr) genes, or those for hypersensitivity or pathogenicity (hrp) that are habitually found in phytopathogenic bacteria. On the other hand, it produces a toxin called albicidin which is extremely efficient in causing symptoms of the disease on the leaves. Furthermore, the genes involved in the biosynthesis of albicidin have been cloned and sequenced, and in silico analysis of these genes has led to the elaboration of a model for the biosynthesis of the albicidin backbone and a partial prediction of its structure.
Although albicidin is a major pathogenicity factor in X. albilineans, it is not the only one. Strains of the bacterium which do not produce the toxin are nevertheless capable of colonizing the sugar cane stems just as well as those which produce albicidin. Other genes for pathogenicity therefore remain to be identified. From an evolutionary point of view, X. albilineans is situated between the Xanthomonas campestris group (a group of bacteria which infects several hundred plants in tropical and temperate zones) and Xylella fastidiosa, a bacterium which attacks numerous plants such as coffee, grapes, fruit trees (citrus fruit, almonds, olives) and decorative trees and shrubs (oak, maple, oleander).
Mode de transmission
X. albilineans is also a quite variable bacterium. Several serologic, genetic and pathogenic variants have been identified. Humans are the principal vectors of the pathogen [through the utilization of contaminated harvesting tools and planting of infected plant material (sugar cane cuttings)]. It also has, however, characteristics of air-borne transmission via still-unknown phenomena (aerosols?, insects?). Sugar cane fields freshly planted with healthy plants can become diseased in a few weeks or months, with no human intervention.
In order to explore the genome of X. albilineans, our group has chosen a strain of X. albilineans (GPE PC73) which was recently isolated in Guadeloupe. This strain causes severe symptoms after inoculation of a variety of sugar cane which is susceptible to the disease. Furthermore, GPE PC73 is part of a group of X. albilineans strains which have been associated with outbreaks of the disease and with epidemics which have occurred in several geographic zones (Cuba, Guadeloupe, Florida, Mauritius, Texas, Taiwan,...) in the last few decades. The deciphering of the genome of X. albilineans should allow us to identify the mechanisms which make it possible for this bacterium to attack sugar cane crops. Moreover, a comparison with the genomes of three species of Xanthomonas and of X. fastidiosa, which have already been sequenced, should permit a better comprehension of the evolutionary phenomena which lead to parasitic specialization of plant pathogenic bacteria.

Mycobacterium chelonae and Mycobacterium abscessus: two rapidly growing mycobacteria which are pathogenic for humans
The genus Mycobacterium belongs to the phylum Actinobacteria (family Mycobacteriaceae) and includes species with a high GC%. Two principal groups may be distinguished: mycobacteria which grow slowly (slow growers) and mycobacteria which grow rapidly (rapid growers). The latter, about 60 species reported to date, are distinguised from the slow growers by their capacity to produce a visible culture in a few days on ordinary medium. Other common characteristics are living in a hydrotelluric environment, and many are naturally multi- antibiotic-resistant.
Mycobacterium abscessus and Mycobacterium chelonae are the main rapid growers which are pathogenic for humans, in whom they provoke a large spectrum of infections: soft tissue infections, and infections of the locomotor apparatus after surgery of injection of drugs, broncho-pulmonary infections, disseminated infections in immunodepressed subjects and graft recipients.
Broncho-pulmonary infections due to M. abscessus which occur in patients with cystic fibrosis (photo 1) are a particularly important problem, and are the object of increased surveillance in France under the auspices of the Vaincre La Mucoviscidose Assocation. These infections are frequent --affecting up to one patient in 20 in some centers-- and affect all ages. They are severe and especially difficult to treat because of the resistance of M. abscessus to many antibiotics. They present a major obstacle to lung transplantation, which often represents the only chance of survival for some patients with cystic fibrosis.
The sequencing of M. abscessus and M. chelonae is of interest for two reasons. The first is that this will be the first human pathogenic rapid grower to be sequenced. The only rapid grower for which a large amount of sequencing data is available is
Mycobacterium smegmatis (TIGR), a species which is almost devoid of pathogenicity for humans and laboratory animals. The sequences of M. abscessus and M. chelonae should provide valuable information about analogies, or relationships, which may exist between these species and the slow growing mycobacteria which are pathogenic for humans.
The second reason for this interest resides in the opportunity to perform a comparative genomic analysis between M. abscessus and M. chelonae, two species which are genetically very close, and which for a long time were considered as two sub-species of the same species. Indeed, although M. abscessus and M. chelonae are both pathogenic for humans, the first is clearly different from the second in its ability to induce a disease which is similar to tuberculosis: tropism for the respiratory tree, production of tuberculoid granulomas with caseous lesions, latency and reactivation of the infection (photo 2). A study using subtractive hybridization ("RDA", for representational difference analysis) recently permitted us to demonstrate that M. abscessus differs from M. chelonae in the presence of genes which have only been identified in slow grower pathogens such as M. tuberculosis, and known to play a role in virulence. Comparative analysis of whole genomes, which will be performed at the "Genome and Informatics" Laboratory in Evry (S. Pasek and J.-L. Risler), would confirm these first results and permit a study of the causative regions. Besides sequences from M. abscessus and M. Chelonae, theise comparisons will also include the proteomes of other completely sequenced mycobacteria, all of which are slow growers (M. tuberculosis, M. bovis, M. leprae, M. paratuberculosis).

Major pathogen of sheep and goats
General information about Mycoplasmas
The bacterium Mycoplasma agalactiae is a major pathogen of small ruminants. This species belongs to the group of mycoplasmas sensu lato, or Mollicutes ("soft skin"), bacteria which are characterized by the absence of a cell wall. The Mollicutes (about 200 species) are rooted in the bacterial taxon of Gram-positive bacteria with low G+C content, or Firmicutes ("hard skin"), which possess a thick cell wall. The loss of this cell wall is thus a derived character state for Mollicutes, which, within the Firmicutes, are related to the Clostridia and the Bacilli. These last two groups are probably paraphyletic.
Because of their reduced genome size, and also their clinical and veterinary importance, the mycoplasmas have received much attention from sequencing centers : more genomes have been entirely sequenced in this group than in any other group. As of Spring 2005, the genomic sequences of Mycoplasma gallisepticum, M. genitalium, M. hyopneumoniae, M. mobile, M. mycoides, M. penetrans., M. pneumoniae, M. pulmonis, Mesoplasma florum, Ureaplasma urealyticum/parvum, Phytoplasma asteris are available, and many others genomes are in the process of being sequenced. The genomic sequences of the Mollicutes have a remarkably low G+C% (U. parvum holds the record for bacteria with a value of 25.5%). The genus Mycoplasma is also unusual in its variation of the genetic code : the nonsense codon UGA codes for tryptophan, a change which could be related to the low G+C content (alternative to Trp codon UGG).
The reduction in size of mycoplasmal genomes is thought to be related to the life style of these bacteria, in close contact with their host. They are either commensals or pathogens, some of which arefacultative intracellular parasites. They are found in both animals (including humans and insects) and plants (Spiroplasmas and Phytoplasmas). The adoption of an parasitic life style, based on harnessing of the resources of the host cell, means that numerous metabolic functions are no longer needed. Mycoplasmas synthesize indeed few precursors de novo, and the loss of genes for numerous biosynthetic pathways has been noted in the genomes of the mycoplasmas that have been sequenced to date. The majority of mycoplasmas have less than 1,000 genes. M. pulmonis, for example has only 782 genes, compared with 4,100 for the related firmicute bacterium Bacillus subtilis. The loss of the cell wall may also be related to intracellular endoparasitism.
The mycoplasmas, most of which are host-specific, cause chronic diseases with slow progression in humans and animals. Human mycoplasmoses are found in diverse diseases of the respiratory and urogenital tracts. Mycoplasmoses which affect farm animals cause considerable economic loss. Antibiotic treatment often fails to eradicate these bacteria. As for other pathogens, it is hoped that the availability of complete genomic sequences will lead to a better understanding of the physiology, pathogenic potential and host specificity of mycoplasmas, and to the development of new prevention and treatment strategies. The large number of sequenced genomes from mycoplasma species makes comparative genomics strategies especially valuable for the prediction of pathogenicity regions and for the comprehension of the evolution of a very diverse group (in terms of pathogenicity, host specificity and also morphology and nutritional requirements). The Molligen database, which is maintained at the CBiB (Bordeaux 2 University), is dedicated to the comparative genomics of mycoplasmas.
Description of Mycoplasma agalactiae
Mycoplasma agalactiae is a very important species in veterinary medicine. It is the causative agent of the "contagious agalactia" syndrome sensu stricto, the principal mycoplasmosis of sheep and goats in Europe, which has a major clinical and economic impact on the milk industry. A closely related species, M. bovis, which infects cattle, induces respiratory and mammary pathologies which are also economically important (calf pneumonia, mastitis and arthritis). These two pathogens produce similar symptoms in their respective hosts and are difficult to differentiate using classical diagnostic methods. They are very closely related (16S RNA sequences have 99.8% similarity), and M. bovis was previously classified as a subspecies of M. agalactiae on the basis of the similarity of their biochemical phenotypes. However, serologic and DNA-DNA reassociation studies led to their classification as two distinct species. These two mycoplasmas belong to the M. hominis group, like M. pulmonis, M. hyopneumoniae and M. mobile. They are therefore rather distant phylogenetically from bacteria of the M. pneumoniae group, such as M. genitalium, M. penetrans and U. parvum.
The sequence data available for M. agalactiae had been very limited until recently ; research focused on hypervariable antigenic systems (vpma genes families) and a few genes which encode various other surface antigens, as well as some insertion sequences and a few "housekeeping genes". The molecular bases of pathogenicity and host specificity of M. agalactiae remain largely unknown. As a first approach, the genomic sequence of this mycoplasma will be compared with that of its close relative, M. bovis (the genome of type strain PG45 is being sequenced at TIGR), and then with sequences of other species of the M. hominis group and more widely, with the sequences of other mycoplasmas which infect ruminants (M. capricolum, M. mycoides subsp. mycoides SC in the Spiroplasma group) using the Molligen database.
The 5632 strain is one of these "intermediate" strains and is being characterized in the ENVT lab (Marenda et al., 2004 ; Marenda et al., to be published). Although it clearly belongs to the M. agalactiae species, the 5632 strain displays several atypical traits: methylation of genomic DNA (dam-like), particular serotype, unusual repertory of vpma genes, presence of insertion sequences (IS) and of a putative conjugation system (ICE) close to M. fermentans ICEF. Those phenotypic characteristics are not found in most M. agalactiae strains, but they are sometimes found in isolates of various origins, which form a particular sub-group within the M. agalactiae species. With the genome sequence of one representative of this sub-group, i.e. 5632, it will be possible to gain a better understanding of the biodiversity within the M. agalactiae species, its evolution and its relationships with related species as M. bovis and M pulmonis, or species which are also pathogenic for small ruminants (M. mycoides subsp. mycoides SC, sequencing under way). Eventually, we may discover the molecular bases for the differences in pathogenic potential and sensitivity to antibiotics that are observed between the various strains, mutants and natural isolates. It will then be possible to design molecular diagnostic tools which will lead to better control of mycoplasmoses.
The annotation of the two genomes will be carried out by expert annotators from the collaborating groups, using the resources available at the Bordeaux Bioinformatics Center (CBiB). The construction of DNA chips based on the identified genes is envisaged, in collaboration with the Transcriptome-Biochips Platform of the Toulouse Genopole. These analytical tools for transcriptomes will facilitate the identification of virulence genes.


Agent of the Murine Respiratory Mycoplasmosis
General information about Mycoplasmas
Mycoplasma pulmonis is a pathogenic bacterium which causes infections in mice and rats. This species belongs to the group of mycoplasmas sensu lato, or Mollicutes ("soft skin"), bacteria which are characterized by the absence of a cell wall. The Mollicutes (about 200 species) are rooted in the bacterial taxon of Gram-positive bacteria with low G+C content, or Firmicutes ("hard skin"), which possess a thick cell wall. The loss of this cell wall is thus a derived character state for Mollicutes, which, within the Firmicutes, are related to the Clostridia and the Bacilli. These last two groups are probably paraphyletic.
The reduction in size of mycoplasmal genomes is thought to be related to the life style of these bacteria, in close contact with their host. They are either commensals or pathogens, some of which arefacultative intracellular parasites. They are found in both animals (including humans and insects) and plants (Spiroplasmas and Phytoplasmas). The adoption of an parasitic life style, based on harnessing of the resources of the host cell, means that numerous metabolic functions are no longer needed. Mycoplasmas synthesize indeed few precursors de novo, and the loss of genes for numerous biosynthetic pathways has been noted in the genomes of the mycoplasmas that have been sequenced to date. The majority of mycoplasmas have less than 1000 genes. M. pulmonis, for example, has only 782 genes, compared with 4,100 for the related firmicute bacterium Bacillus subtilis. The loss of the cell wall may also be related to intracellular endoparasitism.
The mycoplasmas, most of which are host-specific, cause chronic diseases with slow progression in humans and animals. Human mycoplasmoses are found in diverse diseases of the respiratory and urogenital tracts. Mycoplasmoses which affect farm animals cause considerable economic loss. Antibiotic treatment often fails to eradicate these bacteria. As for other pathogens, it is hoped that the availability of complete genomic sequences will lead to a better understanding of the physiology, pathogenic potential and host specificity of mycoplasmas, and to the development of new prevention and treatment strategies. The large number of sequenced genomes from mycoplasma species makes comparative genomics strategies especially valuable for the prediction of pathogenicity regions and for the comprehension of the evolution of a very diverse group (in terms of pathogenicity, host specificity and also morphology and nutritional requirements). The Molligen database, which is maintained at the CBiB (Bordeaux 2 University), is dedicated to the comparative genomics of mycoplasmas.
Description of Mycoplasma pulmonis
Murine respiratory mycoplasmosis (MRM) caused by Mycoplasma pulmonis is one the most important pathologies for laboratory rats and mice. Although this mycoplasmosis may remain clinically silent, this slow-progressing illness has impaired numerous experimental data. MRM is influenced by several factors including environment, host (species and genetic background) and M. pulmonis strain. The M. pulmonis experimental infection is considered as a good model for the development of vaccines. In addition to MRM, M. pulmonis causes genital infections which are associated with a decreased fertility; for this reason it is also a model for the study of intra-uterine infections.
MRM is comparable to the pathological manifestations of M. pneumoniae infections in humans and of other animal respiratory mycoplasmoses. M. pneumoniae is an important human pathogen and mycoplasmoses among farm animals are responsible for considerable economic losses. M. pneumoniae and M. pulmonis belong to distinct phylogenetic groups : M. pneumoniae is more closely related to M. genitalium, M. penetrans and U. parvum (among species whose genome is sequenced), whereas M. pulmonis belongs to the M. hominis group, with ruminant livestock pathogens M. bovis and M. agalactiae.
A review on the molecular biology and mycoplasma pathogenicity:
Razin S., Yogev D., Naot Y. Microbiology and Molecular Biological Reviews 1998;62:1094-1156.
Results of the project have been published: Chambaud, I., R. Heilig, S. Ferris, V. Barbe, D. Samson, F. Galisson, I. Moszer, K. Dybvig, H. Wroblewski, A. Viari, E.P.C. Rocha, and A. Blanchard. The complete genome sequence of the murine respiratory pathogen Mycoplasma pulmonis. Nucleic Acids Research 2001;29(10):2145-2153..

Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is the major cause of tuberculosis
The Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex of organisms consists of the following species: Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium africanum, Mycobacterium bovis, Mycobacterium microti. The last three are now considered to be sub-species of M. tuberculosis. M. tuberculosis is an obligate pathogen and can infect a wide variety of animals. Humans are the principal hosts. Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.TB.) are characterised by slender, straight or slightly curved bacillus, they are non-motile and non-encapsulated and do not form spores. It is an aerobic, Acid fast bacillus (AFB). M.TB. is not classified as either Gram-positive or Gram-negative because it does not have the chemical characteristics of either, although the bacteria do contain peptidoglycan (murein) in their cell wall. If a Gram stain is performed on M.TB., it stains very weakly Gram-positive or not at all (referred to as "ghosts"). It is slow growing, dividing every 18-24 hr, resistant to drying and chemical disinfectants but sensitive to heat (Pasteurisation) and UV light. Mycobacterium tuberculosis was the cause of the "White Plague" of the 17th and 18th centuries in Europe. Today, Mycobacterium tuberculosis is responsible for more morbidity in humans than any other bacterial disease. M.TB. infects 1.7 billion people/year which is equal to 33% of the entire world population. An estimated one in three individuals worldwide carries Mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB) in its latent form. It has been found in the tissues of ancient mummies, and new drug-resistant TB 'superbugs' are rapidly spreading among human populations. Non-human strains have adapted to infect cows, birds, and other animals. Efforts to combat tuberculosis have intensified recently, and an essential tool for researchers is the genome sequence of M. tuberculosis . The bacterium was sequenced in 1998 at the Sanger Institute, in England, and the Pasteur Institute, in Paris. Researchers around the world are now using the information to hunt for genes that bolster its metabolism and increase its virulence. The bacterium's tenacity is perhaps the biggest mystery to tuberculosis researchers. It can linger in the lungs for decades after infection, apparently awaiting a slump in the body's defenses. Once reactivated, TB explodes into full-blown disease in about 10 percent of carriers, attacking and destroying the lungs. How the bacterium survives attack by host immune cells remains unknown. Two years ago, Brigitte Gicquel, of the Pasteur Institute, discovered a gene that influences bacterial virulence, the erp gene. Strains of bacterium without the erp gene grew poorly in mice. Since the identification of erp , researchers have found other genes linked to the bug's virulence. The pcaA gene, for example, affects the strength of the cell wall and the formation of serpentine cords of bacteria, which are characteristic of infection. Mutants lacking this gene replicated normally in mice, but they could not kill their hosts. The pcaA gene was identified by a team of researchers led by William R. Jacobs, Jr., of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, in New York. Tuberculosis is spread through the air when a person with untreated pulmonary TB coughs or sneezes. Prolonged exposure to a person with untreated TB usually is necessary for infection to occur. The symptoms of TB include a low-grade fever, night sweats, fatigue, weight loss and a persistent cough. Some people may not have obvious symptoms. The main effect of TB affects the lungs (pulmonary TB). Other parts of the body can also be affected, for example lymph nodes, kidneys, bones and joints.

Tropheryma whipplei
Tropheryma whipplei causes Whipples disease and has one of the smallest bacterial genomes
Tropheryma whipplei is an emerging Gram-positive human pathogen which causes Whipple's disease which is characterised by systemic effects with alteration in the general state of health, chronic enteritis, joint pain, culture-negative endocarditis, encephalitis and uveitis. Whipple's disease can have numerous symptoms and manifestations, it can also cause arthritis, intestinal disorders, and dementia, it can live undetected in the body for decades and then, without warning, cause a fatal illness. The first case of Whipple's disease was reported in 1907. Men get the disease eight times more often than women, and it mostly affects white males of middle age. The disease is thought to occur at roughly the same rate in Europe and the United States; but it is less common in Africa and Asia. Only one Asian, a Japanese man, is known to have developed the disease. In 2000, French researchers succeeded for the first time in growing the Whipple's disease pathogen, Tropheryma whipplei, in the laboratory, prior to this scientists have not been able to study the pathogen successfully because the bacterium takes four days to do one cell division and reproduce. By comparison an ordinary strain of Escheria coli takes about 20 minutes and generates an entire culture overnight. Now that the genome has been sequenced it has been discovered that the organism has one of the smallest genomes of known bacteria, and the genome is missing many genes found in other bacteria, including some for nutrients and amino acids thought to be essential, the microbe may rely on its host for these. Perhaps the biggest discovery from the genome project was a new family of proteins on the surface of the bacterium that can change over time. By varying the appearance of these surface proteins, the microbe may be able to travel undetected throughout the body. The pathogen's cell wall is a barrier seemingly designed to confuse the human immune system. The wall is thick and has an outer membrane apparently appropriated from human cells. Ultimately the sequencing of the genome may also help researchers to discover ways to cultivate microbes that are difficult to grow in the laboratory.

Wigglesworthia glossinidia
Wigglesworthia glossinidia lives in the gut of the tsetse fly, which transmits the parasite that causes African sleeping sickness
Wigglesworthia glossinidia (endosymbiont of Glossina brevipalpis) is one of the smallest genomes yet to be sequenced. The bacterium bears the name of the British entomologist who first described it, Sir Vincent Brian Wigglesworth. Wigglesworthia glossinidia lives inside the gut of the blood-sucking tsetse fly. The fly transmits a parasite called a trypanosome which causes the deadly African sleeping sickness. The gram negative bacterium and fly live in symbiosis, The bacterium has co-evolved with its insect host over millions of years; this co-evolution has allowed the bacterium to streamline its genome, eliminating genes found in its host. Wigglesworthia's genome still contains remnants of a free-living organism, such as genes for motility. Although scientists have never seen Wigglesworthia swim, they found genes that synthesise flagella-whip-like cellular propellers. The flagella may help Wigglesworthia travel from adult tsetse flies to larvae. The female tsetse fly fertilises its young in its uterus, and the bacteria are then transferred through the mother's milk. One theory for flagella is that they may aid bacteria in locomotion to or invasion of the larval cells. The genome also contains over 60 genes involved in the synthesis of vitamins-nutrients that the tsetse fly relies on for its fertility. This finding confirms previous studies that have indicated that the fly depends on the bacteria to provide these vitamins not found in its restricted diet of blood. Without the bacteria (and vitamins), the tsetse fly is sterile. This sterility may someday be used to prevent the spread of disease. By removing the bacteria from tsetse flies, scientists would stop the development of offspring-reducing fly populations and disease transmission. Social and economic deterioration in southern Africa and the growing AIDS epidemic, which leaves people more susceptible to the trypanosome parasite, have led to a rise in sleeping sickness in recent years. An estimated 500,000 people now have the disease; about 80 percent of them will die from it. The same disease kills about 3 million head of livestock every year.

Wolinella succinogenes
Wolinella succinogenes lives in the rumens of cows and is genetically related to two microbes that cause stomach disorders in humans, H. pylori and C. jejuni
W. succinogenes is a nonfermenting bacterium that grows anaerobic respiration and has been reported to grow in the presence of 2% oxygen). The darting motility of W. succinogenes has triggered several projects that investigated the unique aspects of its monotrichous flagellation and the insertion of the flagellar motor into the pole of the cell. W. succinogenes has been isolated from the bovine rumen, the human gingival sulcus, and dental root canal infections. To understand the origin and emergence of pathogenic bacteria, comparison to their nonpathogenic relatives is a necessary. Therefore, the 2.11-megabase genome sequence of Wolinella succinogenes, which is closely related to the pathogenic bacteria Helicobacter pylori and Campylobacter jejuni, has been sequenced. Despite being considered nonpathogenic to its bovine host, W. succinogenes holds an extensive repertoire of genes homologous to known bacterial virulence factors. Many of these genes have been acquired by lateral gene transfer. In contrast to other host-adapted bacteria, W. succinogenes does contain the highest density of bacterial sensor kinases found in any bacterial genome to date, together with an elaborate signalling circuitry of the GGDEF family of proteins. Because the analysis of the W. succinogenes genome also revealed genes related to soil and plant associated bacteria such as the nif genes, W. succinogenes may represent a member of the epsilon proteobacteria with a life cycle outside its host.

Xanthomonas campestris
Xanthomonas campestris is a plant pathogen that causes black rot in certain plants and weeds
The genus Xanthomonas is a diverse and economically important group of bacterial phytopathogens, belonging to the gamma-subdivision of the Proteobacteria. Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris (Xcc), a Gram-negative aerobic rod, is the causal agent of black rot, which affects crucifers such as Brassica and Arabidopsis. Symptoms include marginal leaf chlorosis and darkening of vascular tissue, accompanied by extensive wilting and necrosis. Full leaf yellowing, wilting, and necrosis occur as the disease advances. The Xcc bacterium also infects weeds, including Arabidopsis thaliana , which has been sequenced and is the model species used in plant research. Researchers can now test hypotheses about genes associated with plant infections using the publicly available genome sequences of the plant pathogen ( Xcc ) and one of its hosts (Arabidopsis). Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris is grown commercially to produce the exopolysaccharide xanthan gum, which is used as a viscosifying and stabilising agent in many industries. Researchers have sequenced two major plant pathogens of the genus Xanthomonas, each species preys on different crops and infects plants in different ways, but the two genomes have 80 percent of their genes in common. Comparative analysis between the two Xanthomonas strains allows possible identification of a set of strain-specific genes, some of which are probably responsible for the distinct pathogenicity and host specificity profiles of these organisms.

Xylella fastidiosa
Xylella fastidiosa causes economically important plant diseases including citrus variegated chlorosis disease
Xylella fastidiosa is a Gram-negative , fastidious, xylem-limited bacterium that causes a range of economically important plant diseases including citrus variegated chlorosis disease (CVC) of oranges and other citrus fruits. X. fastidiosa is also know to cause Pierces disease, a lethal disease to grapevines. The bacterium is spread by certain kinds of leafhoppers known as sharpshooters. While snacking, these insects carry the bacterial infection from plant to plant, transferring X. fastidiosa directly into the plant's xylem, the vascular tissues. There, the bacteria multiply, clogging the plant's internal plumbing and blocking the flow of water to leaves. Trees and plants weaken, leaves discolour, and fruits appear prematurely, remaining small, hard and worthless. Other strains cause leaf scorching of woody perennials such as American elm, maple, mulberry, or plum. The genome sequence reveals the presence of homologues of virulence factors in animal pathogens. Also, genes involved in ion-sequestration and the production of toxins and antibiotics were detected. Such genes may have been acquired by X. fastidiosa (via horizontal gene transfer) to respond to plant defence mechanisms or pesticidal control. Xylella fastidiosa was the first plant pathogen and the first plant associated bacterium to have been sequenced.

Campylobacter Jejuni
Description and significance
Campylobacter jejuni is a Gram-negative bacteria that is curved and rod-shaped. It is most commonly found in animal feces, especially in wombat, kangaroo and bird feces. Campylobacter jejuni is a microaerophilic organism, meaning that it requires an environment that contains a reduced concentration of oxygen (~3-5% of oxygen and ~2-10% of carbon dioxide). Because of this requirement, it is very sensitive to stress in the environment. For example, too much oxygen, acidic conditions, heating, and drying(Ref.2). Campylobacter jejuni is the number one cause of food-borne illness in the United States. Therefore, it is very important to sequence its genome to determine its role in these food-borne illnesses and devise effective treatments. Campylobacter jejuni is present in high levels in diarrhea stools of infected individuals as well as animal feces. This bacteria can be isolated from humans and animals. Isolation requires special antibiotic-containing media and an environment that contains optimal level of oxygen for microaerophilic organims(Ref.1).

Ecology
Campylobacter jejuni is an interesting bacterium because it contains some eukaryotic-like system for N-linked protein glycosylation(Ref.3). The disease Camylobacter jejuni causes is known as campylobacer enteritis or gasteroenteritis. The bacteria use their flagella at both poles for adhesion and invasion of the host(Ref.1). The illness leads to severe diarrhea and fecal leukocytes. These symptoms are usually combined with fever, headaches and muscle pain. Children under 5 and young adults are more vulnerable to get the disease more than other groups. Although Campylobacter is the number one cause of food-borne illness, it is the least deadly. The case/fatality ratio is about 1/1000 which is very low(Ref.2).
Pathology
The Campylobacter bacteria is found in the intestines of many animals and some humans. They cycle through the intestinal environment and lead to diarrhea. Clinical evidence suggests that the site of Campylobacter infection seems to be the ileum and jejunum in the small intestines rather than in the large intestines. Although it is the leading cause of food-borne illness in the United States, Campylobacter can be easily killed by cooking or heating. In most cases, Campylobacter can contaminate water, milk or undercooked meat, especially chicken. It only takes a small amount of bacteria to cause infection. The illness usually lasts 2 to 5 days, and most of these cases will disappear without treatment. However, 25% of these patients are likely to have a relapse(Ref.5).
The early symptom of Campylobacter infection is usually abnormal abdominal pain and is then followed by bloody diarrhea. Other common accompanying symptoms are fever, headache, muscle pain, and sometimes vomiting and dehydration may occur. Although vomiting and dehydration are not usually prominent, they may be severe enough to lead to death. Complication of Campylobacter infection may also contribute to mortality. For example, deaths have occurred in patients who also have cirrhosis, malnutrition, and lymphoma(Ref.4).
Application to Biotechnology
Campylobacter jejuni is not known to produce any useful compounds or enzymes. It is mainly known as a pathogen that causes most food-borne illness in the United States. However, Campylobacter jejuni produce an enzyme called beta-lactamase that is associated with its antibiotic-resistance, mostly to ampicillin and penicillin. The mechanism of beta-lactamase in Campylobacter jejuni is still unknown, but effective antibiotics are developed to treat Campylobacter jejuni infected illness(Ref.7). For example, the most effective antibiotc for the treatment is erythromycin. Clinical treatments have suggested that patients treated with erythromycin have significantly reduced the presence of Campylobacter jejuni in their stools, although little is known about its mechanism. Despite erythromycin's effectiveness, moderate erythromycin resistance of Campylobacter jejuni is still present(~5%). However, because the patient is usually recovers without treatment, erythromycin resistance of Campylobacter jejuni is insignificant. Therefore, erythromycin is still the most preferred antibiotic for the treatment of this illness(Ref.6)

3) Campylobacter jejuni is the major cause of food-borne illness worldwide, and is a common source of contamination is drinking water. It was thought that Campylobacter jejuni is not able to multiply in water or biofilms, but a recent experiment was done to estimate the survival ability of Campylobacter jejuni in water and biofilms. By using Propella biofilm reactor and FISH method, the results indicate that the real number of bacteria living in water and biofilms is seriously underestimated(Ref.10)

Campylobacter fetus
Description and significance
Campylobacter fetus is a slender, spirally curved bacterial pathogen, enclosed with an S layer of special crystalline surface proteins. (Their unique function will be discussed later) . It is a gram-negative species holding two membranes and a thin cell wall in between. It is a pathogen, and can reside anywhere in the human body. The Campylobacter fetus S layer proteins were found to have a virulence factor in resistance to the host immune defense mechanisms (5). According to the Journal of Clinical microbiology, (2) Two subspecies were then suspected to exist in the Campylobacter fetus. One was Campylobacter fetus subsp. fetus and Campylobacter fetus subsp. Venerealis. To further investigate the genetic diversity among C. fetus strains of different origins, multiple genetic analyses were used such as polymorphic DNA (RAPD), pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE), and DNA-DNA hybridization. (3) It was also mainly found that its natural habitat of C. fetus subsp. fetus is the intestinal tract of cattle, but it can also cause abortions.

Cell structure and metabolism
It has flagella for motility using the proton motive force for energy. Since it is gram-negative, it has three layer of protection --inner membrane, thin murein layer and an outer membrane. This organism has the optimal growth at atmospheres enriched with CO2 and 5% oxygen with nitrogen or hydrogen according to the journal of bacteriology(2). Camplylobacter fetus needs an anaerobic environment for growth. It needs a respiratory type of metabolism for growth. These bacteria do not ferment; they also do not oxidize carbohydrates. Their entire energy is produced by certain amino acids and the tricarboxlic acid cycle intermediates. Their special features are their unique S layer surface proteins.
Ecology
Campylobacter fetus has been studied and shown to adhere to those intestinal epithelial cell lines that it invades in humans. The information from this study reported in the Canadian Journal of Microbiology (1) shows that this Campylobacter fetus showed capabilities of adhering to many cell lines. This is just one example of the kind of cells this bacterium interacts with. Since this is a pathogen it interacts with many host cells either in humans or in animals mostly cattle.
Pathology
Campylobacter fetus is a bacterium that can interact and disrupt reproduction cycles. Since they have many possible surface layer proteins they have an antigenic variation that can trick the immune system. There are two types of mechanism by which these bacteria infect since there are two subspecies. The Campylobacter fetus subsp. Venerealis is found on bull mucus layer over the crypt cell layer of the male prepuce. This way, the bacteria is transmitted to the female cattle and causes its infertility. This is also the way it will get transferred again during mating. Campylobacter fetus subsp. Fetus is using a different infection mechanism in which the animal whether bird, reptile ingest the bacteria, it invades the mucus cell and can cause an abortion. The two subspecies uses different ways to invade the host. Humans are mostly not affected but can accidentally ingest the Campylobacter fetus subsp. Fetus and suffer severe symptoms such as inflammation of intestinal tract.(5)
Application to Biotechnology
Not applicable for this species.
Current Research
Suggest two mechanisms for this. One is the resistance to the non-immune serum by preventing the binding of this serum to the C. fetus cell surface proteins. Another way might be the one I already mentioned about varying its S layer coat proteins thus avoid the antibodies of the immune system.

Sphingomonas
Description and Significance
Sphingomonas is a Gram-negative, nonsporeforming, chemoheterotrophic, strictly aerobic bacterium that typically produces yellow- or off-white-pigmented colonies. It is unique in its possession of ubiquinone 10 as its major respiratory quinone, and of glycosphingolipids (GDLs) instead of lipopolysaccharide in their cell envelopes. The bacterium is metabolically versatile, which means it can utilize a wide range of naturally occuring compounds as well as some types of environmental contaminants. Therefore, studies have been held to further explore its metabolic mechanisms for more application in biotechnology, in addition to its current utilization in biomeditation and in the food technology. Also some species of Sphingomonas (especially S. paucimobilis) cause minor infection in humans and damage some other organisms.



Ecology
Sphingomonas has been found in various environments, including both aqueous (both fresh- and seawater) and terrestrial habitats, plant root systems, clinical specimens, and others. Its widespread distribution in the environment is due to its ability to utilize a wide range of organic compounds and to grow and survive under low-nutrient conditions. Although many strains of Sphingomonas have been isolated from relatively clean environments, a great portion of them also had been discovered in contaminated locations which included toxic compounds such as PCBs, creosote, pentachlorophenol, herbicides, etc. In one study by Nishiyama et al, a strain of S. paucimobilis that degrades hexachlorocylohexane survived and grew in contaminated soil, especially inside of soil aggregates less than 0.025 mm in diameter, despite its surviving poorly in an unamended control soil. Also, the bacterium maintained higher population densities in the presence of the contaminant than in its absence. These discoveries demonstrate that Sphingomonas can utilize contaminants as a growth and energy source and that it can compete successfully with the indigenous organisms in various environments.
Pathology
Some species of Sphingomonas, especially S. paucimobilis, are found in equipment in hospitals and various types of clinical specimens, including respiratory therapy items, humidifiers, water, air, bedside water bottles, sinks, and temperature probes. Although infections by S. paucimobilis are rarely serious and could be effectively treated with antibiotics, it is capable of causing active infections in humans. For example, in 1991, at least 18 cases of infections caused by the bacterium were reported, which included six cases of bacteremia (bacterial infections of the bloodstream), two cases of leg ulcers, four cases of peritonitis (in patients undergoing chronic ambulatory dialysis), a case of brain abscess, a case of cervical adenopathy, a case of splenic abscess, a case of respiratory infection, a case of urinary infection, and a case of meningitis (Balkwill et al).
Also, an unidentified species of Sphingomonas is held responsible for coral plague. It was first discovered on the Florida Reef Tract in June, 1995, and is was reported that the star coral showed an unusually rapid rate of tissue degredation (up to 2 centimeters per day). The symptoms included a sharp line between healthy and diseased tissue, which was found in a wider variety of species than the other typical diseases (Richarson et al). It was further reported that, within four months of its initial discovery, the disease had spead about 200 km along the Florida Keys, and the disease continued to spread until around 1997 when it gradually disappeared.
In addition, recent study conducted by Scott T. Kelley et al (2004) showed that Sphingomonas is present in the shower curtain biofilms. The study stated that the "soap scum" of shower curtains is in fact a lush bed of micorbes, full of bacteria that are frequently isolated in wet environments. The authors of the report concluded that shower curtains can threaten immune-compromised or ill patients, and that consistent exposure to source of infection such as shower curtains can lead to health problems (Kelley et al).

Spirochaeta
Description and Significance
The genus Spirochaeta represents a group of free-living, saccharolytic non-pathogenic, obligate or facultative anaerobic helical shaped bacteria. Isolated strains have been obtained from a variety of freshwaters and marine waters (Table 1). Extremophilic species include anaerobic, thermophilic isolated form hot springs in New Zealand, the moderately thermophilic Spirochaeta caldaria from cyanobacterial mats of hot springs in Utah and Oregon and the extremely thermophilic Spirochaeta thermophila from marine areas in Shiaskotan Island in Russia. There are also alkaliphilic spirochetes such as S. alkalica, S. africana, S. asiatica isolated from the alkaline Lake Magadi in Kenya and from sulfide-saturated mud sediments of Lake Khatyn in Siberia (Hoover et al, 2003).
In addition, culture-independent studies revealed the presence of Spirochaeta species in other environments such as anaerobic bioreactors, and the digestive tract of termites (Drone et al, 2003). A number of members of the genus Spirochaeta inhabit extreme environments with respect to temperature, salinity, and pressure . These microorganisms may hence harbor enzymes with potential biotechnological applications (Leschine et al, 2006).

Cell Structure, Metabolism and Life Cycle

Although the helical shape is typical for members of the Spirochetes phylum, a coccoid shaped Spirochaeta spp. was recently isolated from a termite gut by Droge et al. (2006). A picture of this organism can be seen in Figure 3.
The Spirochaeta genus contains a group of saccharolytic bacteria, responsible for decomposition of (poly)carbohydrates in many aquatic environments. All species of the Spirochaeta genus ferment carbohydrates with formation of acetate, ethanol, CO2, and H2 as major end products. In addition, Spirochaeta isovalerica ferments a number of amino-acids in addition to carbohydrates. All isolated Spirochaeta species utilize the Embden-Meyerhof pathway for glucose catabolization with formation of pyruvate.
Ecology and Applications
Species of the Spirochaeta genus are common inhabitants of a variety of aquatic environments, such as the water, sediments and muds of ponds, marshes, lakes, rivers and oceans. In these environments, Spirochaeta are capable of competing with other microorganisms for available nutrients by exhibiting various types of mobility behaviors. The unique mobility of Spirochetes is due to the helical shape of the cells and the polar positioning of the axial filaments. They are also able to move on surfaces similar to gliding bacteria. And they could move through environments of high viscosities, high enough that most flagellated bacteria cannot.

There are symbiotic relationships that were observed in the species, Spirochaeta plicatilis has been associated with Beggiatoa. The spirochete has been found lurking among the trichomes of Beggiatoa. They were found to attracted towards the trichomes through chemotaxis of the metabolites produced by the Beggiatoa which are the substrates of the spirochete. It has also been known that one of its species, Spirocheata caldaria, probably forms symbiotic relationships with the bacteria, Clostridium thermocellum. Spirochaeta caldaria is a thermophilic spirochete taken from a freshwater hot spring. A study conducted by Pohlschroeder et al. showed that cellulose degradation is enhanced in Clostridium thermocellum when the spirochete is present within its environment.
Experiements have shown that some species of Spirochaeta could possibly be used in the direct bioconversion of cellulose-containing wastes to fuel such as ethanol or hydrogen gas (Leschine et al, 2006). Another application of it is that since some species are extremophilic and can survive in high temperatures and high salt concentrations, some of its enzymes can be used.

Chloroflexus aurantiacus J-10-fl
Description
Chloroflexus aurantiacus. This organism is one of the deepest branching phototrophs, and has some characteristics of both green non-sulfur and purple photosynthetic bacteria. It is the most well studied of the green non-sulfur bacteria, a group that describes a collection of various phototrophs and nonphototrophs. These thermophiles live in hot springs of neutral to high pH and grow in mats, typically as the lowest layer in the mat with cyanobacteria above them, or as filamentous tendrils. The bacterium grows as a photoheterotroph and consumes the organic products the cyanobacteria produce, although it can also be photoautotrophic under anaerobic conditions and chemoorganotrophic under aerobic conditions. Like other green sulfur bacteria, the light-harvesting apparatus exists in chlorosomes, which consists of reaction centers surround by a protein-stabilized glycolipid monolayer, at the inner surface of the cytoplasmic membrane, although the reaction centers are more similar to the type II systems found in cyanobacteria than the type I systems found in green-sulfur bacteria. Carbon is fixed in a completely unique manner, by using the 3-hydroxypropionate pathway. The multicellular filaments this organism produces are capable of gliding motility.
Description
Chloroflexus aurantiacus J-10-fl. Chloroflexus aurantiacus J-10-fl (DSM 635) was isolated from the Hakone hot spring area in Japan and will be used for comparative analysis.


Frankia sp. EAN1pec
Description
Frankia. This genus is a member of the actinomycetales and forms a symbiotic nitrogen-fixing association with a number of plants. Vesicles, which are spherically differentiated structures, are formed inside of the plant cell and are the sites of bacterial nitrogen fixation. The genus is named after the Swiss microbiologist, A.B. Frank, and was originally thought to be a fungus due to the extremely hyphal morphology of the organism.
Description
Frankia strain EAN1pec. This strain was isolated at the Kettering Research Laboratory in Ohio by M. Lalonde in 1978.


Mycobacterium tuberculosis CDC1551
Description
Mycobacterium. This genus comprises a number of Gram-positive, acid-fast, rod-shaped aerobic bacteria and is the only member of the family Mycobacteriaceae within the order Actinomycetales. Like other closely related Actinomycetales, such as Nocardia and Corynebacterium, mycobacteria have unusually high genomic DNA GC content and are capable of producing mycolic acids as major components of their cell wall.
Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. This bacterium is the causative agent of tuberculosis - a chronic infectious disease with a growing incidence worldwide. This species is responsible for more morbidity in humans than any other bacterial disease. It infects 1.7 billion people a year (~33% of the entire world population) and causes over 3 million deaths/year. This bacterium does not form a polysaccharide capsule, and is an extremely slow growing obligate aerobe. The sluggish growth rate is a result of the tough cell wall that resists the passage of nutrients into the cell and inhibits waste products to be excreted out of the cell. The specialized cell envelope of this organism resembles a modified Gram positive cell wall. The envelope contains the typical polypeptide layer, the peptidoglycan layer, and free lipids. It also contains complex fatty acids, such as mycolic acids, that cause the waxy appearance and impermeability of the envelope. These acids are found bound to the cell envelope, but also form cord factors when linked with a carbohydrate component to form a cord-like structure. These fatty acid-carbohydrate complexes inhibit phago-lysosome fusion and are often considered to be indicators of virulent strains. The cell envelope also includes adhesins and aggressions, but does not contain any known toxins. Primary infection occurs by inhalation of the organism in droplets that are aerosolized by an infected person. The organism initially replicates in cells of the terminal airways, after which it is taken up by, and replicates in, alveolar macrophages. Macrophages distribute the organism to other areas of the lungs and the regional lymph nodes. Once a cell-mediated hypersensitivity immune response develops, replication of the organism decreases and the bacteria become restricted to developing granulomas.
Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis strain CDC1551. This strain, also nicknamed "Oshkosh", is a recent clinical isolate from a clothing factory worker from the Kentucky/Tennessee, USA, region. It is highly contagious, infecting approximately 80% of the patient's social contacts. However, this strain has not caused epidemics in man and is sensitive to a wide range of drugs. It is also highly virulent in a mouse lung model, producing several orders of magnitude more bacteria than the H37Rv strain when inoculated.
Properties

Streptococcus thermophilus LMG 18311

Description
Streptococcus thermophilus. This organism is a lactic acid bacteria often used as a starter culture for fermented dairy products including yogurt and cheese. At the same time this dairy species is phylogenetically close to pathogenic streptococci, evoking the possibility that it has a virulence potential. The genome sequences and analysis of two yogurt strains of S. thermophilus will be reported in the paper.
Description
Streptococcus thermophilus strain LMG 18311. This strain was isolated from commercial yogurt in 1974 in the United Kingdom and is easily manipulated genetically.


Thermosipho africanus TCF52B
Description
Thermosipho africanus. Thermosipho africanus, a member of the Thermotogales, has the characteristic morphology of one or more cells contained in a sheath-like envelope which extends beyond the cell wall. Preliminary sequencing of Thermotogales genomes has identified extensive horizontal gene transfer between these organisms and the Archaea. Thermosipho africanus has been isolated from marine hydrothermal systems and oil reservoir production waters.
Description
Thermosipho africanus TCF52B. This organism was isolated from the Troll oil formation in the North Sea and will be used for comparative analysis.


Yersinia pestis Pestoides F
Description
Yersinia. This genus consists of 11 species, 3 of which are human pathogens. Specific virulence factors are encoded within pathogenicity islands (PAIs) that are required for the invasive phenotype associated with Yersinia infections. These PAIs may be carried on extrachromosomal plasmids or on the chromosome. One key virulence plasmid contained by the three human-specific pathogens is pCD1/pYv, which encodes a type III secretion system for the delivery of virulence proteins that contribute to internalization into the host cell.
Description
Yersinia pestis. This species was originally described by Institut Pasteur scientist Andre Yersin in 1894 in Hong Kong. It is the causative agent of plague (bubonic and pulmonary) a devastating disease which has killed millions worldwide. The organism can be transmitted from rats to humans through the bite of an infected flea or from human-to-human through the air during widespread infection. Yersinia pestis is an extremely pathogenic organism that requires very few numbers in order to cause disease, and is often lethal if left untreated. The organism is enteroinvasive, and can survive and propagate in macrophages prior to spreading systemically throughout the host. Yersinia pestis consists of three biotypes or serovars, Antiqua, Mediavalis, and Orientalis, that are associated with three major pandemics throughout human history. The first occurred during the first millenium, the second occurred from 1300 up to the 19th century (Black Death), and the third started in China during the 19th century and continues to this day. A fourth biovar type has been proposed, Microtus.
Yersinia pestis contains multiple copies of insertion elements, especially IS100, as compared to other Yersinia spp., and 2 species-specific plasmids, pMT1 and pPCP1. pMT1 encodes a protein, murine toxin, that aids rat-to-human transmission by enhancing survival of the organism in the flea midgut. Deep tissue invasion is due to the presence of a plasminogen activator encoded on the pPCP1 plasmid. Yersinia pestis also contains a PAI on the chromosome that is similar to the SPI-2 PAI from Salmonella that allows intracellular survival in the organism.
Description
Yersinia pestis Pestoides F. This strain lacks a plasminogen activator and is virulent by the aerosol route. The genome of this organism is being sequenced for a comparative genomics project.
Properties


Frankia sp. CcI3
Biology of Frankia
Frankia sp. strains comprise a distinct lineage among the high Mol% G+C Gram positive Actinobacteria . They are filamentous "euactinomycetes" that grow by hyphal branching and tip extension and thus resemble the antibiotic-producing Streptomyces sp. Frankiae are developmentally complex, producing three cell types during growth: vegetative hyphae, sporangiospores and lipid-enveloped cellular structures known as "vesicles". The latter develop during N-starvation and contain the O2-labile nitrogenase. In symbiosis, they supply sufficient combined nitrogen so that the plant can grow without added nitrogen.
Physiologically, Frankia strains grow slowly in defined nutrient media. They grow best on short-chain fatty acids, dicarboxylic acids or other low MW organic acids (propionate, succinate, pyruvate, etc.) plus ammonia, or N2, as the nitrogen source. Some strains grow on simple sugars. Frankiae thus have all housekeeping genes necessary for saprophytic existence plus genes for sporulation, vesicle development, symbiosis, N2 fixation and secondary metabolite production.
Frankia sp. strain HFPCcI3 was isolated in 1983 at Harvard Forest in John Torrey's lab by Zhang Zhongze. HFPCcI3 grows slowly on organic acids such as propionate or pyruvate and will grow on some complex media. It is resistant to kanamycin and, like many actinomycetes, to nalidixic acid. Its ultrastructure has been studied both with respect to its free-living existence and its presence in nodules of Casuarina sp. HFPCcI3 belongs to a group of closely related strains that nodulate Casuarina and Allocasuarina spp. The Casuarinaceae is a tropical family of trees and shrubs whose natural range includes Australia and the Melanesian region of the Pacific. They have been planted on islands and in coastal regions of the Indian Ocean, New Zealand, Africa and North and South America, especially in the Caribbean islands, Florida and California where they have been used for soil stabilization, as windbreaks and for lumber and firewood.
The Global Importance of the Actinorhizal Symbiosis
The importance of Frankia sp. strains derives from their ability to form nitrogen-fixing root nodule symbioses on certain woody angiosperms, termed "actinorhizal plants". Actinorhizal plants are classified in eight plant families, 24 genera and more than 200 species. These symbioses add a large proportion of new nitrogen to several ecosystems . They constitute the major N 2 -fixing symbioses in temperate forests ( Alnus ), dry chaparral and matorral ( Ceanothus, Trevoa, Talguenea, Chamaebatia, Cercocarpus, Purshia ), coastal dunes ( Casuarina, Myrica, Hippophae ), alpine communities ( Alnus ) and in colder regions ( Alnus, Dryas ) such as in Scandinavia, Canada, Alaska or New Zealand where legumes are insignificant or absent. Actinorhizal symbioses are thus key to establishing and maintaining many forests and shrublands, particularly on occasions where climatic or anthropogenic changes disrupt ecosystems.
For more information see: http://web.uconn.edu/mcbstaff/benson/Frankia/FrankiaHome.htm#
Relevant Publications
Benson, D.R. and W.B. Silvester, Biology of Frankia strains, actinomycete symbionts of actinorhizal plants. Microbiol. Rev., 1993. 57 : p. 293-319.
Zhang, Z., M.F. Lopez, and J.G. Torrey, A comparison of cultural characteristics and infectivity of Frankia isolates from root nodules of Casuarina species. Plant and Soil, 1984. 78 : p. 79-90.

Oenococcus oeni PSU-1
Oenococcus oeni PSU-1
On the basis of 16S rRNA sequence, Dicks et al. (2) proposed a reclassification of Leuconostoc oenos into a new genus, Oenococcus oeni. O. oeni shares relatively little DNA homology with the other genera in the Leuconostoc branch of the LAB (1). Woese argued that O. oeni is an example of a fast-evolving microorganism (7). Subsequent comparisons of RNA polymerase genes contradicted this view (5). Whole genomic comparisons between O. oeni and the nonacidophilic Leuconostoc mesenteroides (also sequenced as part of the LABGC project) will help resolve this issue and shed light on the evolution of this unusual branch.
Perhaps the most studied aspect of O. oeni is the ability to convert malate to lactate (the malolactic conversion). This involves uptake of malate, its decarboxylation to L-lactic acid and CO2, and subsequent export of end products. The malolactic conversion generates energy for the cell in the form of a proton motive force (6). Recently the genes encoding the malate decarboxylase and malate permease have been cloned and characterized (3, 4).
Most likely due to difficulties in gene transfer, there are few studies employing genetic strategies to examine O. oeni. Several bacteriophages and plasmids have been characterized (6). In addition, the broad host range transposon Tn916 has been mobilized into the O. oeni genome (8). To date, however, few chromosomal genes from O. oeni have been sequenced (< 20 entries in GenBank).
Many researchers have examined the diversity of O. oeni strains within and around wineries. Studies have employed various molecular typing methods (protein profiling, plasmid profiling, RAPD, PFGE, rDNA RFLP, etc.) to discern regional differences in strains. An outcome of this analysis is the general view that Oenococcus is a genetically homogenous genus.
The strain sequenced in this project, O. oeni PSU-1, was originally isolated at Penn State University and is currently employed commercially to carry out the malolactic fermentation wines.


Prochlorococcus marinus NATL2A
Prochlorococcus marinus NATL2A is a low light-adapted strain of photosynthetic autotroph Prochlorococcus and plays a major role in ocean carbon sequestration.
Strain NATL2A is a low light-adapted ecotype of Prochlorococcus, isolated at 10 m in the North Atlantic Ocean, 38? 59? N, 40? 33? W (Garczarek et al., 2000). This strain belongs to a clade (Rocap et al., 2002) that is most numerous at a depth of about 100 m below the surface. As a group, Prochlorococcus is speculated to be the most abundant photosynthetic organism on the planet (Partensky et al 1999), and is responsible for a significant fraction of photosynthesis in the world's oceans. In the subtropical Pacific, for example, it often represents 50% of the total chlorophyll. These tiny cyanobacteria are also the smallest known photosynthetic organisms with a genome size of approximately 2 Mb, and possess an unorthodox pigment composition of divinyl derivatives of chlorophyll a and b, a-carotene, zeaxanthin (Goericke and Repeta, 1992, Chisholm et al 1988) and a type of phycoerythrin (Hess et al 1996). The latter has not yet been shown to function in light harvesting. By contrast, the highly related Synechococcus contains chlorophyll a and phycobilins that are more typical of cyanobacteria. To date, Prochlorococcus is the only photosynthetic organism known to contain this particular combination of pigments. As such, it has recently been suggested to be an extant model for the ancestral photosynthetic bacterium that gave rise to cyanobacteria as well as chloroplasts (Tomitani et al 1999). Sequence analysis of the Prochlorococcus genome may shed more light on this hypothesis and on cyanobacterial radiation in general.
Prochlorococcus
: The Smallest and Most Abundant Photosynthetic Microbe in the Oceans
Prochlorococcus is a unicellular cyanobacterium that dominates the temperate and tropical oceans. It lacks phycobilisomes that are characteristic of cyanobacteria, and contains chlorophyll b as its major accessory pigment. This enables it to absorb blue light efficiently at the low-light intensities and blue wavelengths characteristic of the deep euphotic zone. It contributes up to 70% of the total photosynthesis in the oligotrophic oceans, and thus plays a significant role in the global carbon cycle and the Earth's climate. Description of the complete genome of this microbe will greatly advance our understanding of the regulation of these globally important processes. Prochlorococcus is an ideal candidate for complete genome sequencing because (1) it is the smallest known phototroph with a relatively small genome (1.8 Mb), (2) it is widespread and abundant and is easily identified and enumerated in situ using flow cytometry, (3) its unique photosynthetic pigment (divinyl chlorophyll) makes its contribution to total photosynthetic biomass in the oceans easily assessed, and (4) we have an extensive culture collection of isolates from different oceans and environments. At least two ecotypes of Prochlorococcus coexist in the oceans that are distinguished by their photophysiology and molecular phylogeny. One is capable of growth at irradiances where the other is not. Ultimately, a comparison of the complete genomes of these two ecotypes would provide valuable insights into the regulation of this type of microdiversity in marine microbial systems. In addition, the use of microarray technology for the analysis of gene expression patterns will give us unprecedented insights into how these microbes cope with the dilute environment of the oligotrophic oceans.
Light-harvesting apparatus of Prochlorococcus
Prochlorococcus marinus is the type species of an only in 1992 described group of marine cyanobacteria that use (divinyl-)chlorophyll a and b. Prochlorococcus possesses a remarkable adaptability to different environmental conditions and might be the most abundant oxyphototrophic organism on earth. In this project, selected genetic and physiological characteristics of the photosynthetic apparatus of Prochlorococcus are studied. In particular, the function of a Prochlorococcus -specific phycobiliprotein-based putative light harvesting system is investigated that exist in some genotypes but not in other, whereas all Prochlorococcus strains use (divinyl-)chlorophyll a/b-protein complexes as the major antenna system.

Rhodopseudomonas palustris BisB5
Rhodopseudomonas palustris BisB5
Rhodopseudomonas palustris strains BisB5, HaA2, BisB18 and BisA53 (Bacteria, 5.5 Mb each): Phototrophic, fix carbon dioxide and nitrogen, produce hydrogen, degrade biomass-associated aromatic compounds under anaerobic (phototrophic) and aerobic (heterotrophic) conditions.
One strain (CGA009) of R. palustris has been sequenced by the JGI and the sequence has revealed a surprising richness of metabolic versatility. This facultatively phototophic bacterium can grow with or without oxygen, fix nitrogen, produce hydrogen and it has highly developed biodegradation capabilities. The genome sequence of strain CGA009 revealed that the number of options that R. palustris has within its major metabolic modes to take advantage of fluctuating supplies of carbon, nitrogen, light and oxygen is even larger than was previously suspected based on physiological studies. It encodes for example, three nitrogenase isozymes, five benzene ring cleavage pathways and four light harvesting 2 systems. The genome sequence of strain CGA009 thus reinforces the notion that R. palustris is a generalist able to respond and adapt to changing conditions in the temperate soil and water environments in which it is so widely distributed.
Against the background of general metabolic versatility of the R. palustris species there is considerable strain-to-strain diversity. Four additional strains of R. palustris will be sequenced. These additional genome sequences will provide a basis for defining the genetic and functional differences that can exist within the species Rhodopseudomonas palustris. The 16S rRNA sequence of each of the strains differs from that of the already sequenced strain (CGA009) by about 2%. The strains to be sequenced were isolated by direct plating from two different sites, one pristine and one polluted. The strains were frozen immediately following their isolation and have had minimal exposure to the laboratory environment. The strains to be sequenced differ from each other in BOX-PCR genomic DNA fingerprints. Although the strains have not been extensively characterized phenotypically, they have some obvious differences. They differ in pigmentation, in growth on benzoate, and the cells of each strain have slightly different shapes and sizes, although they all have the distinctive appearance of R. palustris.


A ubiquitous genus in marine environments
Marinobacters belong to a ubiquitous marine genus described in 1992 by the Centre d'Oceanologie de Marseille. This genus seems ubiquitous in marine environments because several strains have been isolated or detected from biotopes which are very diverse in terms of geographic and physiochemical characteristics (hypersaline bacterial mats, marine hot-water springs in Japan, or cold seawater as in Arctic and Antarctic regions). The metabolic versatility of Marinobacters allows them to use substrates reputed to be recalcitrant to degradation such as hydrocarbons as carbon and energy sources, and a large number of publications have analyzed this unusual type of metabolism.
The type strain, Marinobacter hydrocarbonoclasticus, exhibits remarkable physiological characteristics. It is capable of growing as a free planktonic form, or it may remain fixed and form biofilms. It degrades some hydrocarbons. It is extremely halotolerant, and produces an osmoprotectant, ectoin.
Like many other Marinobacters, it is a facultative and denitrifying aerobe. Furthermore, it synthesizes an extracelllular phosphatase.
The sequencing of the type strain will lead to a better comprehension of the genes implicated in the assimilation of carbon sources which are simple and labile (OOB, Banyuls), or recalcitrant such as hydrocarbons (LEM, Pau), in the synthesis of extracellular enzymes (IBSM-Marseille), in the formation of biofilms (LEM, Pau); and in the mechanisms of adaptation to salt (LMGEM, Marseille). This study will lead to a major advance in the understanding of the fundamental metabolism of a ubiquitous marine micro-organism.

A symbiotic nitrogen-fixing actinobacterium
A symbiotic nitrogen-fixing actinobacterium
Bacteria of the genus Frankia belong to the class Actinobacteria. These bacteria were originally linked to fungi, because of the mycelium-like filaments many of them form. They have Gram-positive cell walls and their genomes display a high percentage of bases G and C (high G+C%). Actinobacteria notably include bacteria of the genus Mycobacterium, the causative agents of tuberculosis and leprosy, and bacteria of the genus Streptomyces, which produce many antibiotics.
Twelve species of Frankia are recognized today. These are nitrogen-fixing bacteria which live in symbiosis with a large spectrum of dicot plants (24 genera belonging to 8 families). These plants, with their symbiotic bacteria, are collectively responsible for 15% of the biologically fixed nitrogen in the world. Actinobacteria are not the only group that includes nitrogen-fixing bacteria : some are also found among the alpha-proteobacteria - Azospirillum which promotes the growth of graminaceae or Rhizobium, which fixes nitrogen in nodules formed on the roots of legumes - and among cyanobacteria - one species of which lives in symbiosis with the leaves of a water fern Azolla.
The Frankia alni ACN14a strain was isolated from a green alder (Alnus crispa) growing in Tadoussac, Canada. This bacterium is able to establish a nitrogen-fixing symbiosis with alder (Alnus spp. ) and myrtle (Myrica spp. ), two pioneer plant genera of temperate regions, found on forest clearings, mine wastes, sand dunes and glacial moraines where nitrogen is the limiting factor. Frankia alni causes root hair deformation: it penetrates the cortical cells and induces the formation of nodules which resemble those induced by Rhizobium in legumes. These nodules are then colonized by vegetative hyphae (mycelium filaments) which differentiate into diazo-vesicles. It is in these specialized, spherical, thick-walled cells that reductive nitrogen fixation takes place, protected from molecular oxygen by numerous layers of tightly stacked hopanoid lipids. No genetic system exists so far for unraveling the workings of the symbiosis between Frankia and its hosts. However, sequencing the genome of the ACN14a strain will help us understand how this interaction takes place, the nature of secondary metabolites produced, and how evolution has proceeded. The Frankia alni genome sequence will be analyzed through comparison with other sequenced actinobacteria: Streptomyces, Mycobacterium, Corynebacterium, Tropheryma and Bifidobacterium.


A phytopathogenic bacterium with a wide host range
Comprehension of the molecular mechanisms
The comprehension of the molecular mechanisms which give a pathogenic bacterium the ability to invade, colonize and reorient the physiopathology of its host is a goal of primary importance, from both academic and medical or agronomic points of view: such studies may direct the conception of new strategies to fight these pathogenic agents. The bacterium Ralstonia solanacearum is a widely accepted model organism for the study of pathogenicity in plants. This soil-borne bacterium, which belongs to the group of beta-proteobacteria, is responsible for bacterial wilts on more than 200 plant species from 50 botanical families. Several of the susceptible plants, such as potato (in which the disease caused by the infection is called brown rot), tomato, eggplant, pepper, tobacco and banana tree, are of prime agro-industrial importance. R. solanacearum in present in all the tropical and subtropical regions of the globe; recently there has been dissemination of strains with an optimal growth temperature corresponding to the temperate zones of Europe and the United States.
The study of R. solanacearum is complementary to that of the other phytopathogenic model bacteria Pseudomonas syringae, Xanthomonas campestris and Xanthomonas citri. These three species attack the aerial parts of the plant, whereas R. solanacearum, which is capable of living for prolonged periods in the soil, infects its hosts beginning with the root system and presents a very strong tropism for the xylem vessels. Its extensive multiplication in the water-conducting system leads to a systemic infection of the plant.

First exploration of the genome of R. solanacearum
For a first exploration of the genome of R. solanacearum, Christian Boucher's group at the Laboratoire Interactions Plantes-Microorganisms (LIPM, mixed CNRS/INRA unit) selected the GMI1000 strain. This strain, which was isolated in Guyana from a withered tomato plant, belongs to the Asiatic clade and has a wide host range. Furthermore, it can infect the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, whose genome has been entirely sequenced. This ability offers the possibility of studying host responses at the genomic scale. The genomic sequence of GMI1000 which was assembled at Genoscope has been annotated by C. Boucher's group. It is 5.8 Mb long and is organized in two replicons, a chromosome of 3.7 Mb and a megaplasmid of 2.1 Mb.
The annotation work has led to the identification of numerous candidate genes for pathogenesis, including structural genes for more than 50 so-called "effector" proteins. Some of these proteins act by perturbing the metabolism of the plant cell, whereas others suppress the defense reactions of the plant. The effectors are injected by the bacterium into the plant cell using a type III secretion system, whose components had been characterized before sequencing. Among other factors of pathogenesis identified during the annotation are several lytic enzymes, enzymes which control the production of plant hormones and numerous factors implicated in cell adherence. This work, which was published in January 2002, also presented evidence for the type of role horizontal genetic transfer could play in the acquisition of pathogenicity.
The genomic sequence of GMI1000
The genomic sequence of GMI1000 only presents a small part of the genetic diversity of R. solanacearum, as shown by a sampling of the genome of another strain. Almost 100 kb from the genome of the strain Molk2, which belongs to the American clade and is strictly limited to the banana tree, were sequenced at random. Comparison of the sequences indicates that up to 30% of the genome of Molk2 is absent in the genome of GMI1000. This observation has justified the launching of a new sequencing project at Genoscope in 2004, in collaboration with C. Boucher's team. The objective is to obtain a draft of the genomic sequence of two new strains, Molk2 and 1609. Like Molk2, this latter strain belongs to the American clade, but differs in that it does not attack banana trees, and in that it is especially well-adapted to the potato. The 1609 strain is considered to be the type strain for strains introduced in Europe.
The research in progress today is mainly oriented toward functional analysis of the effectors and the characterization of their molecular targets in the plant cell. The sequencing of two additional strains will create a new research axis: the analysis of determinants of parasitic specificity. This work will utilize a pangenomic chip from GMI1000 which is available today. The capacity of this chip will soon be extended with new genes which will be identified in the genomic sequences of the Molk2 and 1609 strains. Thus increased, the chip will enable correlations between genes present and expressed in about 50 strains of R. solanacearum ( collection maintained at LIPM) and the nature of plant hosts which can be infected by these strains. Using the data obtained in this way, C. Boucher's team will try to develop a molecular tool which will make it possible to rapidly evaluate the infectious potential of any new R. solanacearum strain.

An atypical rhizobium
An atypical rhizobium
Ralstonia (Wautersia) taiwanensis LMG19424 belongs to the rhizobia group of bacteria and is therefore capable of establishing a nitrogen fixing symbiosis with leguminous plants.
This symbiosis is established by the formation of specialized structures called nodules on the roots of the host plant, the interiors of which are where the bacteria fix nitrogen from the air. In the past, this symbiotic ability had been restricted to the alpha-proteobacteria, but recently this has been extended to a limited number of beta-proteobacteria belonging to the genera Burkholderia and Ralstonia.
R. taiwanensis LMG19424 was originally isolated from a nodule from the legume species Mimosa pudica in Taiwan. The genome of strain LMG19424 comprises of three replicons, a chromosome of 3.5 Mb, a megaplamid of 2.4 Mb and a symbiotic plasmid of 0.5 Mb which carries the genes that are essential for nodulation and nitrogen fixation.
Since R. taiwanensis LMG19424 is an atypical rhizobium and is phylogenetically distantly related to the classic rhizobia from the alpha-proteobacteria group, it will be important to compare the sequence from this genome with other rhizobia sequences (Sinorhizobium meliloti, Bradyrhizobium japonicum and Mesorhizobium loti). The sequence of R. taiwanensis will be extremely useful in the study of the origin, evolution and genetic basis of the rhizobium-legume symbiosis. It will also contribute to the understanding of the relationship between symbiosis and pathogenicity since the genus Ralstonia comprises of species that are plant pathogens, such as R. solanacearum, and opportunistic human pathogens.

Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus
Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus burrows into another microbe, killing it and using the remains to make offspring
Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus is a highly motile Gram-negative delta-proteobacterium that preys on other bacteria. Bdellovibrio are ubiquitous in nature, having been discovered in a wide variety of environments that include both aquatic and terrestrial habitats as well as mammalian intestines. Their prey includes plant, animal, and human pathogens
Despite the small dimensions of Bdellovibrio cells (0.2 to 0.5 Am wide and 0.5 to 2.5 Am long), its genome consists of 3,782,950 base pairs (bp) on a single circular chromosome
In attack phase, B. bacteriovorus swims at high speed using a single sheathed polar flagellum with a characteristic dampened filament waveform. Once B. bacteriovorus has collided with a prey cell, it remains reversibly attached to it for a short "recognition" period , after which it becomes irreversibly anchored via the pole opposite the flagellum. Before invasion of the prey cell can be achieved, B. bacteriovorus generates a small opening in the prey cell's outer membrane and peptidoglycan layer, which is ultimately resealed. A mixture of hydrolytic enzymes is applied in a locally targeted manner that prevents excessive damage to the prey and counters diffusion
Upon entry into the prey periplasm, B. bacteriovorus sheds its flagellum and soon afterward it starts cellular events such as DNA replication and the synthesis of cellular biopolymer, it then alters the cell shape of its prey, forming a joint structure called the bdelloplast . The previously rod-shaped prey becomes rounded by a process believed to involve the hydrolysis of peptide crosslinks and glycanase activity. Studying the molecular mechanisms of Bdellovibrio's degradative enzymes gives insight into those targets in prey cells that have proven to be evolutionarily successful points of attack and offers the possibility for the design of antimicrobial agents



Candidatus Blochmannia pennsylvanicus
Candidatus Blochmannia pennsylvanicus is an endosymbiont of Camponotus pennsylvanicus, (Carpenter Ant)
Millions of years ago, free living bacteria developed a close intracellular relationship with several species of insects, such as carpenter ants, aphids, tsetse flies, and many others. No one knows quite how the bacteria started living inside the insect cells, but once they were established there, they quickly made themselves indispensable. The bacteria are housed within the insect in specialised cells called bacteriocytes, and they aid the host by providing services specially adapted for the relationship. For example, many species of insects rely on their bacterial symbionts for the production of essential nutrients that the insect is not capable of making on its own and cannot obtain from its diet
In turn, the bacteria have become completely dependent on their insect hosts and are no longer capable of surviving outside the host cell. As the bacteria have adapted to these relationships, known as obligate symbiosis, they have evolved highly streamlined genomes that are specialized to provide the host-beneficial functions necessary to support their symbiotic lifestyle
The distinct lifestyle of obligately intracellular bacteria can alter fundamental forces that drive and constrain genome change. The sequencing of the 792-kb genome of Blochmannia pennsylvanicus, an obligate endosymbiont of Camponotus pennsylvanicus, has enabled researchers to trace evolutionary changes that have occurred in the context of a bacterial-ant association. Comparison to the genome of Blochmannia floridanus reveals differential loss of genes involved in co-factor biosynthesis, the composition and structure of the cell wall and membrane, gene regulation, and DNA replication


Chlamydophila pneumoniae
Chlamydophila pneumoniae causes pneumonia and bronchitis in humans
The genus Chlamydia includes 3 species that are pathogenic to humans: Chlamydophila pneumoniae, Chlamydia psittaci, and Chlamydia trachomatis
Chlamydophila pneumoniae is an obligately intracellular Gram-negative bacterium
Chlamydophila pneumoniae is a respiratory pathogenic infection which causes mild pneumonia or bronchitis in adolescents and young adults. Older adults may experience more severe disease and repeated infections. It may be associated with atherosclerotic vascular disease, Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis and asthma
Chlamydophila pneumoniae, is an airborne organism and is present in half the US population by the time they are 20
The genome has been sequenced and compared to that of Chlamydia trachomatis, the pathogen responsible for eye infection that can lead to blindness, and sexually transmitted diseases such as pelvic inflammatory disease. Comparison of the Chlamydophila pneumoniae genome with the Chlamydia trachomatis genome allowed the researchers to investigate the common biological processes required for infection and survival in mammalian cells.


Helicobacter hepaticus
Helicobacter hepaticus causes chronic hepatitis and liver failure in mice
H. hepaticus is a motile Gram-negative , Microaerophilic organism 0.2 to 0.3 m in diameter, 1.5 to 5.0 m long, and curved to spiral in shape, with one to several spirals; it has bipolar sheathed flagella (one at each end) but lacks the periplasmic fibres that envelope the bacterial cells in other mouse Helicobacter species. H. hepaticus has strong urease activity, is oxidase and catalase positive, produces H 2 S, reduces nitrate to nitrite, and grows microaerobically at 37 C but not at 25 C or 42 C. H. hepaticus has a circular chromosome of 1,799,146 base pairs, Helicobacter hepaticus causes chronic hepatitis, liver cancer (hepatocarcinoma) and inflammatory bowel disease in mice. The organism is most likely transmitted by fecal-oral route however the mode of liver invasion is unknown but the production of urease and a soluble hepatotoxic factor may be involved in the pathogenesis of H. hepaticus -induced liver lesions. The importance of H. hepaticus to humans is not yet completely known. Most Helicobacter species identified to date are characteristically associated with (and named after) specific mammalian host species where generally they inhabit the gastrointestinal tract (with or without causing gastritis or other chronic inflammatory disease), the potential host range for some species is quite broad. H. pylori, originally isolated from humans, has recently been isolated also from the domestic cat; this raises the possibility that Helicobacter pylori may be a zoonotic pathogen that can be transmitted from companion animals to humans and also raises the possibilities that other Helicobacter species may be able to colonise other hosts. The genomic variability of H. hepaticus was assessed by comparing the genomes of 12 H. hepaticus strains with the sequenced genome by microarray hybridization. Although five strains, including all those known to have caused liver disease, were indistinguishable from ATCC51449, other strains lacked between 85 and 229 genes, including large parts of HHGI1, demonstrating extensive variation of genome content within the species.
Hierarchy

Legionella pneumophila
Legionella pneumophila causes Legionnaires' disease
The first discovery of bacteria from genus Legionella was in 1976 when an outbreak of pneumonia at an American Legion convention led to 29 deaths. The causative agent, what would come to be known as Legionella pneumophila, was isolated and given its own genus. The organisms classified in this genus are Gram-negative bacteria that are considered intracellular parasites. Legionella pneumophila is a motile, rod-shaped, gram-negative, aerobic, bacterium. It requires complex nutritional requirements such as high cysteine levels and low sodium levels to grow. Legionella pneumophila have always been found in non-marine aquatic environments such as lakes and ponds. The optimum growth temperature range for this bacteria is 20-45 degrees Celsius. It thrives in areas where there are high concentrations of rust, algae, and organic particles, as these supply the bacteria with a source of iron as well a nitrogen. These are necessary for providing nutrients for growth, as well as protection from harsh chemicals. The organism has been found to possess the ability to survive in tap water at room temperature for over a year. Legionella, in their natural environments, grow within other organisms. For example, the bacteria have frequently been found to be in very close association, possibly an endosymbiotic relationship, with certain protozoan. Hartmanella vermiformis, Tetrahymena thermophila, and Acanthamoeba castellani are just a few of the protozoa that have been identified to have Legionella growing within them. The reason why Legionella grow inside these amoebae is because the bacteria multiply intracellularly, and therefore require the amoebae to aid in reproduction. It has been determined that one amoebae can house enough Legionella bacteria to infect a human being, and this single amoebae is small enough to fit in one droplet of aerosolised water. Legionella bacteria are transmitted to the lungs of human beings through a process called aerosilisation. The most common devices that have been found to transmit the bacteria are air conditioning cooling towers, however, there are many other devices that can transmit the bacteria. Infection by Legionella pneumophila results mainly in Legionnaire's Disease. However, some strains of the bacteria have been known to manifest a disorder called Pontiac Fever. This is a very mild infection which causes influenza-like symptoms and will go away without treatment. Incidence of Legionellosis or Legionnaire's Disease have increased over the past decade or so because of the use of central air conditioning, especially in office buildings, hotels, and hospitals. The first symptoms of Legionnaires Disease are noticed anywhere within two to ten days post-infection. On average, however, its usual incubation is about five to six days. It is primarily characterised by a bacterial pneumonia. Initially, however signs such as anorexia, malaise, myalgia, and headache should concern doctors of the possibility of infection by the Legionella bacterium . Other more specific symptoms of this disease are: nonproductive cough, high fever with chills, abdominal pain, vomiting and diarrhea. The major side-effect of Legionnaire's Disease is is respiratory failure which requires mechanical ventilation. Other complications are acute renal failure, hypotension, and shock. In hospitalised patients the most recent case fatality rate has been determined to be fifteen percent.


Propionibacterium acnes
Propionibacterium acnes causes the skin disorder "acne"
Propionibacterium acnes is a major inhabitant of adult human skin, where it resides within sebaceous follicles, usually as a harmless commensal although it has been implicated in acne vulgaris formation. Propionibacterium acnes is the most common Gram-positive , non-spore forming, anaerobic rod encountered in clinical specimens. P. acnes typically grows as an obligate anaerobe, however, some strains are aerotolerant, but still show better growth as an anaerobe. It has the ability to produce propionic acid and catalase along with indole, nitrate, or both indole and nitrate. Propionibacterium resembles Corynebacterium in morphology and arrangement, but is non-toxigenic. P. acnes is the causative agent of acne vulgaris (pimples). It is a common resident of the pilosebaceous glands of the human skin. The bacteria release lipases to digest a surplus of the skin oil, sebum, that has been produced. The combination of digestive products (fatty acids) and bacterial antigens stimulates an intense local inflammation that bursts the hair follicle. Then, a lesion forms on the surface of the skin in the form of a pustule (Whitehead). Since acne is caused in part from an infection, it can be suppressed with topical and oral antibiotics such as clindamycin, erythromycin, or tetracycline. Some other forms of therapy include chemicals that enhance skin removal (i.e. benzoyl peroxide) or slow the production of sebum (Retin A and Accutane). P. acnes is highly susceptible to various beta-lactam antimicrobial agents such as piperacillin and ampicillin-sulbactain. This bacteria is also very sensitive to penicillin G. Acne caused by Propionibacterium acnes is not common in adults over the age of 25, only about 20% of the population over the age of 25 have acne into their adulthood and women are more susceptible than men. Other infections for which P. ances has been implicated include corneal ulcers, heart valves and prosthetic devices, and central nervous system shunts. A rare heart disease known as Propionibacterium acnes endocarditis has been discovered in a prosthetic valve infected with P. acnes . The valve was also complicated by multiple mycotic aneurysms.


Ralstonia solanacearum
Ralstonia solanacearum causes southern wilt, a common and devastating plant disease
Ralstonia solanacearum is a Gram-negative , aerobic, motile rod bacteria from the Pseudomonas family, whose genome is G+C rich (69%) and organised on 2 chromosomes. It causes extremely harmful plant disease, with a number of unique features, that makes it a model system for plant pathogenicity. Found worldwide, the bacterium is well-adapted to life in the soil, where it waits for a host plant to inhabit. It causes southern wilt in over 200 species by infecting the host's roots and invading the xylem vessels. Typically, the stem cross-sections ooze a whitish bacterial exudate. R. solanacearum is also the agent of the Moko disease in bananas and brown rot in potatoes. This wide host range allows for study of an array of virulence factors. Ralstonia uses dozens of genes to produce attachment factors and inject proteins into the host through a secretion system.


Anaplasma phagocytophilum
Classification
Higher order taxa
Species
Anaplasma phagocytophilum; Anaplasma marginale; Anaplasma platys(2)
Description and significance
Anaplasma phagocytophilumis an intracellular obligate pathogen. It is widely distributed and can be found in North America, Europe, and Asia. Anaplasma phagocytophilum causes the disease human granulocytic ehrlichiosis(HGE) and is most often spread through tick bites and is thus widely studied. The bacterium infects and colonizes neutrophils in host organisms, often leading to immunodeficiency diseases(1). The human granulocytic ehrlichiosis pathogen was first described in 1994 in patients in Wisconsin and Minnesota(14). Ticks collected from the area of infection were also discovered to be carriers of the HGE pathogen(14). The infectious agent, first classified as Ehrlichia phagocytophila has recently been reclassified as Anaplasma phagocytophilum(14).

Cell structure and metabolism
Anaplasma phagocytophilum is a small gram-negative bacterium of 0.2-2 micrometer diameter(5). It is a obligate intracellular pathogen and replicates within a host cell vacuole to form a morula microcolony(5). On the membrane surface of Anaplasma phagocytophilum can be found its major antigenic membrane proteins, p44 and msp2, both of which are approximately 44-kDa in size(13). These two membrane proteins play a vital role in Anaplasma phagocytophilum virulence. The bacterium has a Type-IV secretion apparatus by which it is able to transfer materials between itself and the host(12). Unlike many gram-negative bacteria, Anaplasma phagocytophilum lacks a peptidoglycan layer on its outer membrane(7). In addition, it lacks the genes necessary for the biosynthesis of lipid A and peptidoglycan, resulting in very fragile cells that are highly susceptible to stress(7). Anaplasma phagocytophilum is a disease causing intracellular bacterium in dogs, humans, horses and ruminants(3). It lacks lipopolysaccharide biosynthetic machinery(12). The bacteria reside in host endosomes whereby they obtain the nutrients sufficient to carry out binary fission(12). Due to the lack of the ability to synthesize peptidoglycan, Anaplasma phagocytophilum relies on membrane cholesterol to maintain physical integrity(7). Anaplasma phagocytophilum also lacks genes related to the biosynthesis or modification of cholesterol or related sterols(7). All cholesterols are therefore are directly taken from exogenous sources without extensive modification before incorporation into the membrane(7). Anaplasma phagocytophilum is able to carry out major metabolic pathways including glycolysis, the citric acid cycle and the pentose phosphate pathway(16). It is able to metabolize saccharides such as pentose, fructose and mannose into metabolic intermediates(16).
Ecology
Anaplasma phagocytophilum is distributed widely throughout vast geographical regions. In North America, it is most common in the north-east, upper Midwest and northern California in the United States(5). It is also discovered in several European and Asian countries(1). It is prevalent in regions with tropical to sub-trophical climate (10). Anaplasma phagocytophilum can be successfully cultured at 37 degrees Celcius(Park). The primary host of Anaplasma phagocytophilum in North America is the white-footed mouse with human beings as merely accidental hosts(9). A wide range of mammals such as horses, cows, and sheep can serve as host for the bacterium(5).
Pathology
Anaplasma phagocytophilum is the cause of Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis. This is a prevalent human tickborne zoonosis of the neutrophils (1). The pathogen persists within the polymorphonuclear leucocytes(1). The disease was first identified in 1990 in a patient in Wisconsin (1). Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection in humans delays the onset of apoptosis in neutrophils, allowing for more effective infections of the neutrophils(5). Anaplasma phagocytophilum also causes an increase in IL-8, a neutrophil chemoattractant that increases the phagocytosis of neutrophils. Studies suggest that this is to increase bacterium dissemination into neutrophils(5). These permutations to the neutrophils can lead to immunological changes, making the host more susceptible to opportunistic infections(1). Human granulocytic anaplasmosis is characterized by, but not limited to, symptoms of malaise, fever, myalgia, headache, gastrointestinal tract involvement (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea) and involvement of the respiratory tract (cough, pulmonary infiltrates) (1). Other injuries to the body sometimes include skin rash, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and damage to the liver(1). Anaplasma phagocytophilum also causes ehrlichiosis in other species including domesticated animals such as horses, sheep, and cattle (10). Similar to human granulocytic anaplasmosis, these forms of anaplasmosis are caused by the bacterium transmitted via tick bites (10).

Current Research
Currently research is being conducted with regards to the AnkA gene in Anaplasma phagocytophilum. AnkA is a 153-160kDa protein with 11 N-terminal ankyrin repeats and a C-terminus with several tandem repeats(17). Currently, AnkA is the only protein that is known to be secreted by Anaplasma phagocytophilum and is believed to be instrumental in the infection of neutrophils. It is hypothesized that AnkA leaves the bacterium via its type IV secretion apparatus and binds to the nuclear proteins of neutrophils(17). AnkA varies among different strains of Anaplasma phagocytophilum although different populations maintain regions of conservation(17). Currently, the effect of geological variation of AnkA on its function is unknown Research is also conducted into the methods with which Anaplasma phagocytophilum resists the immune system. The primary method with which neutrophils attack pathogens is via the superoxide anion, produced by the NADPH oxidase complex(15). However, once within the host cell, Anaplasma phagocytophilum rapidly detoxifies the superoxide via a still unknown method and resides within a protective vacuole that segregates it from superoxide anions(15). The mechanism of superoxide anion resistance remains to be discovered. Research is also conducted in the area of serological interaction between Anaplasma phagocytophilum and Anaplasma marginale. It is noted that in cattle and horses exposed to Anaplasma marginale, antibodies to A. phagocytophilum were also produced(10). Conversely, cattle and horses exposed to A. phagocytophilum also produce antibodies to A. marginale(10). Thus, currently serological testing methods are presently under evaluation as they lack specificity.





Granulibacter bethesdensis




Cell structure and metabolism
Granulibacter bethesdensis is usually found in soil and plants, and rarely in human. It produces weak acetic acid by oxidizing glucose and ethanol but can't oxidize lactose, mannitol, sucrose, maltose or xylose (1);It oxidizes lactate and acetate to carbon dioxide and water, and uses methanol as a sole carbon source. There are two major fatty acids: 1) a straight-chain unsaturated acid, 50% of total cellular fatty acid 2)C16:0, 17% of total cellular fatty acid (1). Granulibacter bethesdensis produces acetic acid better with a lower concentration of CaCO3 in ethanol-CaCO3 agar plates (1).
Ecology
Contributions of Granulibacter bethesdensis have not been studied thoroughly. Like many other organisms in Acetobacteraceae family, Granulibacter bethesdensis is a ubiquitous environmental organism, and causes biodegradation of organic waste. Many organisms in Acetobacteraceae family are found in soil and associated with plants, and Asaia bogorensis is the only known organism that causes human disease in this family other than Granulibacter bethesdensis (4). Granulibacter bethesdensis is able to break down ethanol, methanol and formaldehyde to produce non-toxic products, such as carbon dioxide, water and weak acetic acid (1,2).
Pathology
The discovery of the mechanisms about how Granulibacter bethesdensis causes chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) needs further research investigations. CGD is caused by a defect in any of the 4 subunits of the NADPH oxidase, which affects the ability of phagocytes to generate antimicrobial reactive oxygen intermediates (5). It is thought that catalase-positive pathogens causes CGD by depriving the CGD phagocytes of the oxidative metabolites to use against them (2,5,6). However, the narrow list of catalase-positive bacteria that cause CGD suggest that there might be other mechanism beyond catalase (2). Recent research showed that Granulibacter bethesdensis has low virulence and is not fatal;it causes fever, plympahdenitis, and weight loss over almost six months in a patient with X-linked CGD (2).
Application to Biotechnology
The ability of Granulibacter bethesdensis to oxidize ethanol and glucose to produce weak acetic acid in the presence of air may be exploited in vinegar production and wine fermentation (2). It may be used as microbial fuel cell, and production of purified polypeptide enzymes for industrial use.
Current Research
One of the current main researches is to study the epidemiology and pathogenicity of Granulibacter bethesdensis (2). Granulibacter bethesdensis genome sequence contributed to predicting relatedness to other bacteria (7). Some scientists proposed the studies of the high-level resistance of Granulibacter bethesdensis to many antibiotics, and find out if the resistance is intrinsic of the bacteria or induced by antibiotic therapies (4).

Lactobacillus jensenii
Classification
Higher order taxa
Genus
Lactobacillus jensenii
Description and significance
From the genus Lactobacillus, Lactobacillus jensenii is an anaerobic, Gram-positive bacteria. Its thick peptidoglycan wall gives this non-spore forming bacteria a rod-shaped feature (7). It is one of the predominant species (along with Lactobacillus crispatus) found in the female lower genital tract. It was first discovered while scientists (April 1970) were using gel electrophoresis to do a comparative analysis of lactic dehydrogenase activity in Lactobacillus lichmannii from human vaginal discharge. Although both organisms are phenotypically similar, the DNA composition of this new isolate (36.1 ~ 1.2 moles % guanine + cytosine) significantly differed from L. lichmannii in its DNA characteristics (50.8 ~ 0.5 moles % guanine and cytosine)(10). Its ability to colonize and be a part of the natural vaginal microflora has recently become a topic of interest to researchers studying prevention of STDs and harmful vaginal bacteria.


Cell structure and metabolism
L. jensenii, like other members of the Lactobacillus, are rod-shaped, anaerobic Gram-positive microorganisms. Ideal growth conditions require the presence of folic acid, vitamin B12, nictonic acid, and calcium pantothenate at 45 C. It can be differentiated from other species because of the following characteristics: hydrolysis of arginine, production of D-lactate (only), and fermentation of galactose, salicin, esculin, maltose amygdalin, sucrose, ribose, and cellobiose, but not of lactose, melexitose, mannitol, sorbitol, arabinose, and xylose (10).
As an anaerobe and the member of Lactobacillus - bacteria known for acids production, L. jensenii is responsible for producing acid in the vagina by anaerobic metabolism of glycogen. The glycogen is deposited in the vaginal epithelium cells when there is a high level of estrogen, specifically during menstruation period. The vaginal flora and the surrounding epithelial cells metabolize the glycogen into acetic and lactic acid so that the vaginal pH becomes about 4. The strong concentration of the acidic environment help protect the vagina from harmful pathogens in the environment (1).
Ecology
Lactobacillus jensenii has difficulty replicating outside the body. As a matter of fact, L. jensenii (along with Lactobacillus crispatus and Lactobacillus gasseri) is a natural vaginal strain of bacteria colonizing biofilms of the vaginal mucosa in healthy females. This particular vaginal lactobacillus contributes to 23% of the vaginal colony population (following Lactobacillus crispatus-32%), making it the second most prevalent vaginal lactobillus in the lower female genital tract. This hydrogen peroxide producing bacteria contributes to inhibiting anaerobic growth products such as superoxide anion radicals and hydroxyl radicals. Combined with an acidic environment of pH less than 4.5, Bacterial Vaginosis (BV)'s growth as well as transmission and infections of genital related diseases (gonorrhea, urinary tract infection, and chlamydia) or STDs (HIV) are effectively inhibited. Since semen does decrease the acidic environment of the vagina, studies show that repeated and unprotected intercourse increase risk of BV colonization (2).
Pathology
As of June 2007, pathogenicity of Lactobaciluus jensenii for both men and women is unknown. Rather, because of its known role to decrease risks of STDs, this natural member of the human vaginal microflora is considered a protector for the host from acquisition of diseases. (See Ecology for more details)

Current Research
Some of the recent research on Lactobacillus jensenii:
"Inhibition of HIV infectivity by a natural human isolate of Lactobacillus jensenii engineered to express functional two-domain CD4"
Knowing that HIV enters through cervico-vaginal mucosa, Lactobacillus jensenii, which is known to naturally colonize in the vaginal area, is genetically engineered to secrete two-domain CD4 (2D CD4) proteins. The secreted 2D CD4 binds to anti-CD4 receptor and bound HIV-1 gp120, which shows that the engineering did not affect the L. jensenii proteins structure. Moreover, with the usage of luciferase reproter gene, single-cycle infection assays confirmed that the modified L. jensenii is able to inhibit HIV-1 from infecting target cells. Furthermore, when the bacteria were incubated with recombinant HIV-1HxB2 reporter virus, the infectivity of HeLa cells expressing CD4-CXCR4-CCR5 decreased considerably. The decrease in infectivity of HIV-1 with dosage controlled engineered L. jensenii may be a convenient contraception by using natural occurring colonies of bacteria inside the body to block the transmission of HIV.
Engineered Vaginal Lactobacillus Strain for Mucosal Delivery of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus Inhibitor Cyanovirin-N
Lactobacillus jensenii has been genetically engineered to produce and secrete peptide (CV-N) that prevents fusion with HIV using S-protein layer secretion pathway. The modification did not affect the phenotype of the bacteria, but rather was integrated stably into the chromosome. Genetically engineered L. jensenii was able to proliferate in the vaginas of estrus phase mice as well as secrete this anti-HIV peptide. The results of this new Lactobacillus CV-N hybrid show that it is capable of inhibiting "CCR5-tropic HIVBaL infectivity in vitro with a 50% inhibitory concentration of 0.3 nM". This may be an inexpensive and convenient way to block HIV infection and/or replication in women.
Inhibition of Neisseria gonorrhoeae by Lactobacillus Species That Are Commonly Isolated from the Female Genital Tract
Four strains (Lactobacillus jensenii, Lactobacillus crispatus, Lactobacillus acidophilus, and Lactobacillus gasseri) of Lactobacillus were studied because of past reports of the possible link between high colonization of Lactobacillus and low risk of gonorrhea. In this experiment, Neisseria species or Escherichia coli strains serving as target organisms and four clinical isolates of N. gonorrhoeae were added at different pH on plates containing heart infusion agar and saline solutions of respective Lactobacillus strains. All four strains were able to inhibit the gonococcal strains at low pH while L. jensenii and L. crispatus was also able to inhibit N. gonnorrhoeae at neutral pH. None of them were able to inhibit E. coli strains, though L. jensenii was able to inhibit Neisseria cinerea. On the quantitative scale of the assay, L. jensenii were particularly most resistant to N. gonorrhoeae in the four strains. The strains were able to use hydrogen peroxide as mediator to resist the infection. The paper was able to conclude that the presence of L. jensenii and L. crispatus helps reduce risk of gonorrhea.

Mycobacterium smegmatis

Also known by: Mycobacterium paratuberculosis smegmatis, Bacterium smegmatis, Bacillus smegmatis, Mycobacterium paratuberculosis smegmatis, Bacterium smegmatis, Bacillus smegmatis, Mycobacterium smegmatis (7).
Description and significance
Mycobacterium smegmatis was first discovered and isolated in 1884 by Lustgarten. The name smegmatis was first given to Bacillus smegmatis by Trevisan in 1889. Lehmann and Neumann gave the species name smegmatis to Mycobacterium smegmatis in 1899.
Mycobacterium smegmatis lives in aggregate layers of cells attached to each other in a community called a biofilm. Mycobacterium smegmatis are mostly found in the soil, water, and plants. They tend mostly to exist near large bodies of water. Isolates have been discovered in 16 States, Australia, Russia, Canada, and Switzerland (1). Mycobacterium smegmatis is classified as a saprophytic species that rarely causes disease and isn't dependent on living in an animal, unlike some pathogenic Mycobacterium. The bacteria will be finely wrinkled and creamy white while it is growing on accessible nutrients. When Mycobacterium smegmatis has been growing for quite some time and is abundant, the color will turn from white to a creamy yellow to pale orange. It will also be waxy because of the high amount of unique Gram-positive cell wall coated with mycolic acids. The bacteria also ranges in textures, being seen as smooth, flat and glistening or coarsely folded or finely wrinkled (12).
Mycobacterium smegmatis is very useful for the research analysis of other species in the genus Mycobacteria in cell culture laboratories. There are several Mycobacterial species that are common, harmful diseases, like Mycobacterium leprea, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Mycobacterium bovis. Mycobacterium smegmatis is so important because it is fast growing and non-pathogenic compared to these species. There are many similarities between Mycobacterium smegmatis and the much more virulent obligate pathogens that are Mycobacteria. The most significant is the complementary uses of mycothiol biosynthesis of Mycobacterium for making an essential thiol that is responsible for life. If it is knocked out, the species will be terminated and a treatment will be found (10). There is also research involved in finding drug therapies that will inhibit the myolic acid biosynthesis which is essential for creating the unique bacterial cell wall (11). Currently, there are many laboratories that are culturing and isolating this species to determine the pathological course of deleterious Mycobacteria.

Ecology
Biofilms of Mycobacterium smegmatis may use stigmasterol as a carbon source from plants. The bacteria will metabolize the compound to a potent androgen, androstenedione. If Mycobacterium smegmatis is around a large body of water, which is where it usually exists, then the bacteria will secrete androstenedione. The androgen in the water causes female mosquito fish to form male anatomical sex organs (15). Not much else could be found about the contribution to the environment.
Pathology
This organism is classified as saprophytic and therefore relatively safe. Mycobacterium smegmatis doesn't normally reside in any animals, and doesn't cause dangerous or even any infections. There have only been a few threats, which have seem to come out in only extreme cases, however there hasn't been any documented virulence of Mycobacterium smegmatis in over 15 years. There are many other species under this genus are pathogenic. Obligate pathogens such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium bovis, and Mycobacterium leprea are highly pathogenic in animals. These species can cause tuberculosis and leprosy, debilitating diseases that may lead to death or disfigurement. These pathogens can only survive inside the host organism. There is also the classification of potential pathogens in this genus, such as Mycobacterium avium, which may survive outside of the host environment and cause virulence once it is contracted by the host.
However, there has been 1 case where the bacteria has killed a human after infection. In this case, an Italian child was infected by Mycobacterium smegmatis and died at the age of 8. After genetic analysis of the child, it was determined that four nucleotides were inserted, causing a frameshift and a nonsense mutation. The stop codon allowed for a premature stop of translation and essential proteins weren't made. Although this showed potential pathogenic properties of Mycobacterium smegmatis, this case required that the child have two mutant alleles in his genome for the bacteria to be particularly virulent. Therefore in most cases, Mycobacterium smegmatis is generally safe and not pathogenic (5).
Application to Biotechnology
Mycobacterium smegmatis has been used to produce Xylitol. Xylitol is an important sugar that is used as a substitute for commercial dietary sugars to prevent tooth decay and reduce plaque. It is also absorbed more slowly in the bloodstream, so it prevents the negative affects of high blood sugar levels. This is used as a dietary alternative for diabetics. It also has potential treatments for osteoporosis and ear and upper respiratory infections. The D-xylulose sugar produced by Mycobacterium smegmatis is combined with the D-xylose sugar produced by D-xylose isomerase of immobilized Mycobacterium smegmatis to produce the beneficial Xylitol (6).
Mycobacterium smegmatis is also used to transform L-ribulose into L-arabinose with the enzyme L-arabinose isomerase. Mycobacterium smegmatis produces L-arabinose during carbohydrate metabolism. L-arabinose is used by biotech companies to produce chiral drugs. Researchers use L-arabinose as a component for many tissue culture medium. It is also used by food producers for the Maillard reaction to make bread, beer, dried or condensed milk, etc. (6).


Wolbachia pipientis
Classification
Higher Order Taxa
Bacteria; Proteobacteria; Alphaproteobacteria; Rickettsiales; Rickettsiaceae; Wolbachieae; Wolbachia
Genus and Species
Wolbachia pipientis
Wolbachia pipientis wMel
Description and Significance
Wolbachia pipientis are bacteria that infect a wide range of invertebrate, mainly arthropods and numerous insects. Wolbachia is one of the most common pathogens on Earth that infect the reproductive system of insects; it is estimated that more than 18% of insects are infected by it including spider, mosquito, and flies. The bacteria give various physical characteristics of its infection that cause a variety of result including deterring chromosomal sex determination from gamete fertilization. Also, it may initiate parthenogenesis that causes growth and development without fertilization by sperm because it can selectively kill males; thus, it creates a detrimental competition against sperm and causes cytoplasmic incompatibility in fertilized eggs. Wolbachia's uniqueness in altering reproduction has caused many scientists to research the biology of infection and their potential use for controlling pest and pathosis.

Ecology
Based on many studies, the evidence of vertical gene transfer in their hosts by Wolbachia is apparent. However, there's no proof that supports any lateral gene transfer between Wolbachia and D. melanogaster or between Wolbachia and any other hosts. Furthermore, evolutionary evidence shows that mitochondria share a common ancestor with alpha-Proteobacteria, but has no evidence for similarity with mitochondria with species in the order of Rickettsiales.
Pathology
Wolbachia is a parasitic bacteria that infects reproductive system of insects which ultimately affects their linage continuation. The symbiosis between the bacteria and host is complex. Depending on the interaction, it ranges from mutualism to parasitism. The bacteria infect different types of organ, but the remarkable characteristic is their ability to alter the way maternal genes are passed on to the next generation by infecting the testes and ovaries of their hosts. There are four different phenotypes expressed:
Furthermore, Wolbachia are not found in mature sperms, but are found in mature eggs. So, the infection is carried along to offspring by infected females but not males.


Bifidobacterium longum NCC2705
Description
Bifidobacterium. Representatives of this genus naturally colonize the human gastrointestinal tract (GIT) and are important for establishing and maintaining homeostasis of the intestinal ecosystem to allow for normal digestion. Their presence has been associated with beneficial health effects, such as prevention of diarrhea, amelioration of lactose intolerance, or immunomodulation. The stabilizing effect on GIT microflora is attributed to the capacity of bifidobacteria to produce bacteriocins, which are bacteriostatic agents with a broad spectrum of action, and to their pH-reducing activity. Most of the ~30 known species of bifidobacteria have been isolated from the mammalian GIT, and some from the vaginal and oral cavity. All are obligate anaerobes belonging to the Actinomycetales, branch of Gram-positive bacteria with high GC content that also includes Corynebacteria, Mycobacteria, and Streptomycetes.
Description
Bifidobacterium longum. This organism is found in adult humans and formula fed infants as a normal component of gut flora.
Description
Bifidobacterium longum strain NCC2705. This strain was isolated from infant feces. The genome of this strain is being sequenced for comparative genomics.

Bordetella parapertussis 12822
Description
Bordetella. This group of organisms is capable of invading the respiratory tract of animals and causing severe diseases. They express a number of virulence factors in order to do this including filamentous hemagglutins for attachment, cytotoxins, and proteins that form a type III secretion system for transport of effector molecules into host cells.
Description
Bordetella parapertussis strain 12822 . This organism can infect humans and sheep and it is unable to persist in the environment. This strain was isolated from an infected infant in Germany in 1993. The genome contains the gene for pertussis toxin but does not express it.

Bordetella pertussis Tohama I
Description
Bordetella. This group of organisms is capable of invading the respiratory tract of animals and causing severe diseases. They express a number of virulence factors in order to do this including filamentous hemagglutins for attachment, cytotoxins, and proteins that form a type III secretion system for transport of effector molecules into host cells.
Description
Bordetella pertussis Tohama I. This organism, which is unable to persist in the environment, is a strict human pathogen that causes whooping cough and kills hundreds of thousands of people each year. This strain was originally isolated from a patient with whooping cough and has been studied extensively for over 40 years. The chromosome contains a type IV secretion system for export of the pertussis toxin, a typical AB type toxin. The B subunits are involved in attachment to host cells, and the A subunit, the ADP-ribosylating factor, interferes with cell signalling pathways by increasing intracellular cAMP concentrations. The result is an inability of phagocytes to kill foreign invaders such as the bacterium.

Borrelia afzelii PKo
Description
Borrelia afzelii. This species was isolated from a skin lesion from a Lyme disease patient in Europe in 1993. It is a specific aetological agent of acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans (ACA). This organism can be differentiated from other Borrelia species by monoclonal antibody hybridization.

Borrelia burgdorferi ZS7 strain ZS7
Description
Borrelia burgdorferi. This organism is the causative agent of Lyme disease, a multisystemic disease that is considered to be the most prevalent tick-born disease in North America and Europe. This organism was isolated from Ixodes scapularis in 1982. The bacterium is a microaerophilic spirochete that contains seven periplasmic flagella per cell end. Motility is by rapid rotation around the long axis, flexation of the cell and locomotion along a helical path. The most distinctive property is the presence of periplasmic flagella wound around the helical protoplasmic cylinder and encased in an outer sheath. B. burgdorferi has an unusual genome, which includes a linear chromosome and numerous circular plasmids, in some cases containing up to 20 different plasmids.


Borrelia duttonii Ly
Description
Borrelia duttonii. Borrelia duttonii is the causative agent of tick-borne relapsing fever in east Africa. This disease is endemic in much of east Africa and is one of the top 10 diseases associated with deaths in children under the age of five. This disease is transmitted by the bite of the soft-bodied tick Ornithodoros moubata. Ticks become infected with Borrelia duttonii while feeding on an infected rodent. Borrelia then multiplies rapidly, causing a generalized infection throughout the tick. While feeding, the tick passes the organism into a mammalian host through its infectious saliva. Humans become exposed to the infected ticks through contact with rodents or rodent nests. Relapsing fever is characterized by a period of chills, fever, headache, and malaise, an asymptomatic period, followed by another episode of symptoms. This cycle of relapsing is due to changes in the surface proteins of Borrelia, which allow it to avoid detection and removal by the host immune system. This antigenic variation is the result of homologous recombination of silent proteins into an expressed locus, causing partial or complete replacement of one serotype with another.
Description
Borrelia duttonii Ly. Borrelia duttonii Ly was isolated from a 2-year-old girl with tick-borne relapsing fever in Tanzania. This organism will be used for comparative analysis with other Borrelia species.

Borrelia garinii PBi
Description
Borrelia garinii. This organism was orginally classified as Borrelia burgdorferi, however B. garinii was subsequently determined to be a separate species based on genetic analysis. The type strain of B. garinii was isolated from Ixodes ricinus in France. B. garinii is a major causative agent of tick-borne borreliosis in Europe. Neurologic symptoms, such as arthritis, meningitis, and extreme leg and back pain are characteristic of infection by B. garinii.
Description
Borrelia garinii s train PBi. This strain (OspA serotype 4) was isolated in Germany from the cerebrospinal fluid of a patient with neuroborreliosis.

Borrelia recurrentis A1
Description
Borrelia recurrentis. Borrelia recurrentis is the causative agent of louse-borne relapsing fever. Prior to World War II, this organism was responsible for large disease outbreaks with a mortality of up to 40% in much of the world. Currently this disease is limited to parts of Africa, China, and Peru. B. recurrentis is transmitted when infected human body lice (Pediculus humanus) are crushed and their fluids contaminate mucous membranes or breaks in the skin. Relapsing fever is characterized by a period of chills, fever, headache, and malaise, an asymptomatic period, followed by another episode of symptoms. This cycle of relapsing is due to changes in the surface proteins of Borrelia, which allow it to avoid detection and removal by the host immune system. This antigenic variation is the result of homologous recombination of silent proteins into an expressed locus, causing partial or complete replacement of one serotype with another. B. recurrentis has a longer incubation period and longer symptomatic/asymptomatic cycles than other Borrelia species.
Description
Borrelia recurrentis A1. Borrelia recurrentis isolated from adult patient with louse-borne relapsing fever in Ethiopia. This organism will be used for comparative analysis with other Borrelia species.

Bradyrhizobium japonicum USDA 110
Description
Bradyrhizobium japonicum. This nitrogen-fixing bacterium develops a symbiotic relationship with the soybean plant Glycine max and is related to other N2-fixing Rhizobia which are symbiotic with legumes. The bacterium establishes itself in a root nodule which provides a protective environment for the organism to live while the bacterium provides the plant cell with nitrogen. This is an agriculturally important symbiotic relationship as it obviates the need for expensive and environmentally damaging fertilizer.
Genes that code for proteins involved in root nodulation are carried on the chromosome. The production of the nodulation signal, lipochitin, is directed by genes which are turned on in the presence of plant flavonoid compounds. Once the plant recognizes the nodulation signal, root nodule formation is induced. The bacteria are endocytosed into a cortical cell, and are enclosed within a membrane bound organelle termed the symbiosome. The bacteria then differentiate into nitrogen-fixing bacteroids and are supplied with carbon-rich nutrients by the plant.
Description
Bradyrhizobium japonicum strain USDA110. This strain was isolated from Glycine hispida in 1959 in Florida, USA, and has been widely studied because of its superior symbiotic nitrogen fixation with soybeans as compared to other strains. This strain contains a 681 Kb symbiosis island that contains genes for nitrogen fixation and root nodule formation. The chromosome also contains genes resembling those of type III and IV secretion systems.
The original strain designation of USDA110 was 3I1b110, which was gradually changed to USDA110 in the early 1960's with the development of serology and the recognition that 17 different serogroups could be distinguished. USDA110 is the serotype strain for the "110" serogroup. The type strain of the species is Bradyrhizobium japonicum USDA 6 which was isolated from soybean in Japan. USDA acquired this culture from the University of Tokyo in 1929. This culture has a different serogroup affinity to USDA 110 and is in fact the serotype strain of the 6 serogroup.

Brucella abortus S19
Description
Brucella. There are 7 Brucella spp., of which four are pathogenic in humans (Brucella melitensis, Brucella abortus, Brucella canis and Brucella suis). They are highly infectious, and can be spread through contact with infected animal products or through the air, making them a potential bioterrorism agent. Once the organism has entered the body, it can become intracellular, and enter the blood and lymphatic regions, multiplying inside phagocytes before eventually causing bacteremia (spread of bacteria through the blood). Virulence may depend on a type IV secretion system which may promote intracellular growth by secreting important effector molecules.
Description
Brucella abortus. This organism was first noticed on the island of Malta by Dr. David Bruce during an epidemic among British soldiers. It is the primary cause of bovine brucellosis, which results in enormous (billions of dollars) economic losses due primarily to reproductive failure and food losses. In man, it causes undulant fever, a long debilitating disease that is treated by protracted administration of antibiotics. Brucella abortus is listed as a civilian, military, and agricultural bioterrism agent.
Description
Brucella abortus S19. This is a spontaneously attenuated strain discovered by Dr. John Buck in 1923. However, the underlying molecular or physiological mechanisms causing the loss of virulence is not well understood. Since early 1930s, this strain has been used worldwide as an effective vaccine to prevent brucellosis in cattle until it was replaced by strain RB51 during the 1990s. The main objective of this project is to identify genes associated with the virulence or lack there of, through comparison of S19 genome with that of the virulent counterparts.

Saccharophagus degradans 2-40
Description
Saccharophagus degradans strain 2-40. This strain is a marine gamma-proteobacterium that was isolated from decaying Spartina alterniflora, a salt marsh cord grass, in the Chesapeake Bay, USA. It is capable of degrading up to 11 insoluble complex carbohydrates through the collective action of enzyme complexes found on its cell surfaces, utilizing the degradation products as a carbon source. These include chitin, which constitute insect exoskeleton, plant cell wall components such as cellulose, and algal cell wall carbohydrates. This organism may be useful in bioremediation.


Yersinia pestis CO92
Description
Yersinia. This genus consists of 11 species, 3 of which are human pathogens. Specific virulence factors are encoded within pathogenicity islands (PAIs) that are required for the invasive phenotype associated with Yersinia infections. These PAIs may be carried on extrachromosomal plasmids or on the chromosome. One key virulence plasmid contained by the three human-specific pathogens is pCD1/pYv, which encodes a type III secretion system for the delivery of virulence proteins that contribute to internalization into the host cell.
Description
Yersinia pestis. This species was originally described by Institut Pasteur scientist Andre Yersin in 1894 in Hong Kong. It is the causative agent of plague (bubonic and pulmonary) a devastating disease which has killed millions worldwide. The organism can be transmitted from rats to humans through the bite of an infected flea or from human-to-human through the air during widespread infection. Yersinia pestis is an extremely pathogenic organism that requires very few numbers in order to cause disease, and is often lethal if left untreated. The organism is enteroinvasive, and can survive and propagate in macrophages prior to spreading systemically throughout the host. Yersinia pestis consists of three biotypes or serovars, Antiqua, Mediavalis, and Orientalis, that are associated with three major pandemics throughout human history. The first occurred during the first millenium, the second occurred from 1300 up to the 19th century (Black Death), and the third started in China during the 19th century and continues to this day. A fourth biovar type has been proposed, Microtus.
Yersinia pestis contains multiple copies of insertion elements, especially IS100, as compared to other Yersinia spp., and 2 species-specific plasmids, pMT1 and pPCP1. pMT1 encodes a protein, murine toxin, that aids rat-to-human transmission by enhancing survival of the organism in the flea midgut. Deep tissue invasion is due to the presence of a plasminogen activator encoded on the pPCP1 plasmid. Yersinia pestis also contains a PAI on the chromosome that is similar to the SPI-2 PAI from Salmonella that allows intracellular survival in the organism.
Description
Yersinia pestis strain CO92. This strain is a recent Orientalis subtype isolated in the USA from a patient who died of pneumonic plague after acquiring the disease from an infected cat. This strain is 50 Kbp larger than the Yersinia pestis KIM10+ genome due to numerous insertions.

Burkholderia cenocepacia HI2424
The genus Burkholderia consists of some 35 bacterial species, most of which are soil saprophytes and phytopathogens that occupy a wide range of environmental niches. Several of these species, referred to as the Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc), are characterized by unusually high inter-species DNA-DNA hybridization values. Species within this group are further distinguished by being opportunistic human pathogens, particularly problematic in persons with cystic fibrosis (CF). Among these species, Burkholderia cenocepacia is both widely distributed in the environment and accounts for most human infection.
B. cenocepacia strain HI2424 was recovered from agricultural soil in upstate NY (LiPuma et al. 2002). By using various genotyping methods, including macrorestriction digestion with pulsed field gel electrophoresis and multilocus sequence typing, HI2424 is characterized as a representative of the B. cenocepacia PHDC clonal lineage (Chen et al. 2001). This clone appears to be widely distributed as a human pathogen, having been recovered from CF patients in 24 US states (Liu et al. 2003) and Europe (Coenye et al. 2004). HI2424 has three chromosomes consisting of approximately 3.4 Mb, 2.9 Mb and 1.0 Mb. The genome is characterized by the presence of peh, which encodes a polygalacturonase involved in maceration of onion tissue (Gonzalez et al. 1997), and a type IV secretion system, similar in arrangement and homology to those of Brucella suis and Sinorhizobium meliloti (Engledow et al. 2004)
Strain equivalencies HI2424 = BCC1

Burkholderia phytofirmans PsJN
Burkholderia phytofirmans strain PsJN T belongs to the beta-Proteobacteria (Sessitsch et al., 2005) and was isolated surface-sterilized Glomus vesiculiferum -infected onion roots (Nowak et al., 1997). Other strains belonging to this species have been isolated from soils and rhizospheres.
Cells are gram-negative, non-sporulating rods that grows in the presence of various sugars. The strain does not produce nitrate or nitrite. PsJN produces ACC deaminase activity probably contributing to the plant growth promoting abilities of the strain. It produces the quorum signaling compound 3-hydroxy-C8-homoserine lactone. Strain PsJN colonizes varios plants endophytically and in the rhizospheres and plant growth promotion have been reported with various plants such as potato, tomato, grapevine (Frommel et al., 1991; Nowak et al., 1995; Pillay and Nowak, 1997; Bensalim et al., 1998; Ait Barka et al., 2000; 2002; Compant et al., 2005).

Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus DSM 8903
Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus is a thermophilic (70 degrees C), strictly anaerobic asporogenous bacterium that was isolated from a thermal spring in New Zealand. It hydrolyses a variety of polymeric carbohydrates (cellulose, hemicellulose, pectin, a -glucan (starch, glycogen), b -glucan (lichenan, laminarin), guar gum) to acetate, lactate, hydrogen and CO 2 . Trace amounts of ethanol are formed as well. Phylogenetic analysis showed that it constitutes a novel lineage within the Bacillus/Clostridium subphylum of the Gram-positive bacteria.
According to a recent study by DOE/NREL (http://www.ott.doe.gov/biofuels/ process_engineering.html), the desired future biofuel producer would have several features that distinguish it from currently used microorganisms: (i) high yield and low product inhibition, (ii) simultaneous utilisation of sugars (cellulose, hemicellulose, pectin), and (iii) growth at elevated temperatures: robust thermophilic organisms, with a decreased risk of contamination. A bacterium that meets all these criteria is Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus , which is anticipated to play an important role in the development of renewable energy. This thermophilic bacterium efficiently converts an extraordinarily wide range of biomass components to the potential energy source hydrogen. Importantly, pilot fermentation experiments revealed the simultaneous degradation of glucose and xylose. Comparison of its genome with that of related microbes, also with potential for energy production, is expected to result in a gain of fundamental insight in the metabolic capacity and its regulation. Follow-up studies will be aimed at exploiting that knowledge for the engineering of an optimised microbial energy production system.

Chlorobaculum parvum NCIB 8327
The phylum Chlorobi, which includes all known members of the green sulfur bacteria, is one of only six bacterial phyla that contain chlorophototrophic members. Chlorobi are Gram-negative organisms, and all known members are strictly anaerobic and strictly photoautotrophic. Most members oxidize sulfide or thiosulfate as electron donors for carbon dioxide fixation, although some can oxidize hydrogen or ferrous iron. Oxidation of sulfide leads to the extracellular deposition of sulfur globules, which are usually subsequently oxidized to sulfate. Most well characterized strains are capable of nitrogen fixation. In nature these organisms are important in the primary fixation of carbon and nitrogen in anoxic environments where sufficient sulfide and light exist to support their growth. These organisms are thus characteristically found in stratified lakes, microbial mats, and sulfide-rich hot springs. All known members produce a specialized light-harvesting antenna structure, the chlorosome, and Type 1 reaction centers, and all members synthesize bacteriochlorophyll (BChl) c, d or e as the major pigment molecule along with smaller amounts of BChl a and Chl a.

In order to provide a complete molecular description of the physiological and metabolic diversity of the members of the phylum Chlorobi, genome sequencing of the type strains of all described genera and species is in progress. The C. parvum genome was determined by pyrosequencing at The Pennsylvania State University in collaboration with Dr. Stephan C. Schuster. PCR and traditional Sanger sequencing were employed in gap closure, polishing and sequence verification. Initial analyses of the genomic data support the suggestion of Imhoff and colleagues (1, 2) that members of the genus Chlorobaculum are distinct and different from members of the genus Chlorobium.

Chlorobium limicola DSM 245
The green sulfur bacteria (GSB; Phylum Chlorobi ) are commonly found in illuminated, stratified, and anoxic aquatic environments, sediments, and other sulfide-rich environments including hot springs (1, 2). Because of unique adaptations of their light-harvesting antennae, these bacteria are capable of growth at light intensities under which no other phototrophs can survive (3). In some aquatic environments, these organisms can account for up to 83% of the total annual productivity, and thus it is clear that these organisms can be the primary contributors of fixed carbon in certain ecological niches. The known GSB are metabolic specialists: all strains are strictly anaerobic and obligately photoautotrophic in growth mode, and none is capable of dark respiratory or strictly fermentative metabolism. Most of these bacteria use electrons derived from reduced sulfur compounds in combination with light energy to reduce carbon and nitrogen (4). Many GSB strains can also utilize hydrogen as an electron donor for photoautotrophic growth. Thus, in anoxic environments, Chlorobi are very important compontents of the carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles. Carbon fixation in the GSB occurs by the reverse TCA cycle reactions. The photosynthetic apparatus includes homodimeric Type I reaction centers that are distantly related to Photosystem I reaction centers of higher plants and cyanobacteria. The light harvesting antenna, chlorosomes, are ovoid bodies surrounded by a lipid monolayer and filled with more than 200,000 BChl c/d/e molecules and ~2500 BChl a molecules associated with the protein CsmA (5). Because a GSB cell can contain as many as 250 chlorosomes, a GSB cell may contain more than 50 million BChl molecules! It is these enormous antennae that allow the cells to perform photosynthesis at vanishingly low light conditions (4). Although GSB share some biochemical and metabolic properties with other phototrophs, 16S rRNA analyses indicate that these bacteria are only very distantly related to other phototrophs (cyanobacteria, purple bacteria (proteobacteria), heliobacteria, and filamentous anoxygenic phototrophs (green non-sulfur bacteria or Chloroflexaceae ). However, the Chlorobi seem to share a common ancestor with the Bacteroidetes (2).
Chlorobium limicola strain DSMZ 245 T is a non-motile, straight or slightly curved rod-shaped GSB (width: 0.7 to 1.1 microm; length 0.9 to 1.5 microm) that can form elongated cells. This species represents the type species of the genus Chlorobium and was described first by Nadson in 1906 (6). Strain DSMZ 245 T is the neotype and was isolated from Gilroy Hot Spring. The cells are often united in chains resembling streptococci and may produce slime depending on culture conditions. The cells contain BChl c and BChl a as well as chlorobactene as the major photosynthetic pigments. Cells assimilate acetate and propionate during mixotrophic growth. The strain can be grown with molecular hydrogen as photosynthetic electron-donator. Chl. limicola lacks gas vesicles and grows in freshwater medium.

Chlorobium phaeobacteroides DSM 266
The green sulfur bacteria (GSB; Phylum Chlorobi ) are commonly found in illuminated, stratified, and anoxic aquatic environments, sediments, and other sulfide-rich environments including hot springs (1, 2). Because of unique adaptations of their light-harvesting antennae, these bacteria are capable of growth at light intensities under which no other phototrophs can survive (3). In some aquatic environments, these organisms can account for up to 83% of the total annual productivity, and thus it is clear that these organisms can be the primary contributors of fixed carbon in certain ecological niches.The known GSB are metabolic specialists: all strains are strictly anaerobic and obligately photoautotrophic in growth mode, and none is capable of dark respiratory or strictly fermentative metabolism. Most of these bacteria use electrons derived from reduced sulfur compounds in combination with light energy to reduce carbon and nitrogen (4). Many GSB strains can also utilize hydrogen as an electron donor for photoautotrophic growth. Thus, in anoxic environments, Chlorobi are very important compontents of the carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles. Carbon fixation in the GSB occurs by the reverse TCA cycle reactions. The photosynthetic apparatus includes homodimeric Type I reaction centers that are distantly related to Photosystem I reaction centers of higher plants and cyanobacteria. The light harvesting antenna, chlorosomes, are ovoid bodies surrounded by a lipid monolayer and filled with more than 200,000 BChl c/d/e molecules and ~2500 BChl a molecules associated with the protein CsmA (5). Because a GSB cell can contain as many as 250 chlorosomes, a GSB cell may contain more than 50 million BChl molecules! It is these enormous antennae that allow the cells to perform photosynthesis at vanishingly low light conditions (4). Although GSB share some biochemical and metabolic properties with other phototrophs, 16S rRNA analyses indicate that these bacteria are only very distantly related to other phototrophs (cyanobacteria, purple bacteria (proteobacteria), heliobacteria, and filamentous anoxygenic phototrophs (green non-sulfur bacteria or Chloroflexaceae ). However, the Chlorobi seem to share a common ancestor with the Bacteroidetes (2).
Chlorobium phaeobacteroides strain DSMZ 266 T is a non-motile, rod-shaped GSB (width: 0.6 to 0.8 microm; length 1.3 to 2.7 microm) that can form elongated cells. The type strain was isolated from the anoxic sulfide containing water 19.5 m below surface of meromictic Lake Blankvann in Norway and is a representative of the brown-colored GSB species (6). The cells contain BChl e and BChl a as well as isorenieratene and b -isorenieratene as the major photosynthetic pigments. The strain requires vitamin B 12 for growth and lacks assimilatory sulfate reduction. Acetate and fructose can be assimilated during mixotrophic growth. Although it tested positive for hydrogenase activity, the strain cannot be grown with hydrogen as electron-donating substrate. Chl. phaeobacteroides lacks gas vesicles and grows in freshwater medium.

A commensal bacterium of the skin
Staphylococcus xylosus is a Gram positive bacterium with a low G + C content. It belongs to the coagulase-negative group of staphylococci. It is a commensal bacterium of the skin which is of major interest for several reasons.
This bacterium is used as a fermenting agent in the production of meat (sausage) and milk (cheese) products. It contributes to the development of the red color characteristic of sausages through its nitrate reductase activity (photo 1) and to the orange color on the surface of certain cheeses, since some strains of S. xylosus are pigmented (photo 2).
This bacterium is mentioned as a dominant species in production facilities. Some strains of S. xylosus are capable of colonizing surfaces by forming biofilms (photo 3).
There is a great diversity of strains within this species. As a result of this diversity, certain strains isolated from milk and raw ham produce enterotoxins D, C or E, and as such may present a risk for the consumer. Other strains of S. xylosus are opportunistic pathogens of animals. Strains of S. xylosus, some of which have been isolated in nosocomial infections, have been described as multi-resistant to diverse antibiotics.
The genome of S. xylosus is estimated at 2.8 Mb. The complete sequence of this genome will lead to the establishment of the genetic bases of the specific properties of this species in comparison with the genomes of other staphylococci: S. aureus, S. epidermididis and S. carnosus. It will also make it possible to identify the genetic bases for the adaptation of this bacterium to the agro-alimentary environment, and functions of technologic interest. The stud of the genome of S. xylosus will make it possible to evaluate the innocuousness of the strains used as fermenting agents.

A bacterial pathogen responsible for nosocomial infections
The Acinetobacter genus belongs to the gamma subdivision of Proteobacteria, and to the Moraxellaceae family. Genoscope has already sequenced the genome of Acinetobacter sp. ADP1, a soil isolate. A. baumannii, on the contrary, is a pathogenic species. In the industrialized countries of the Northern Hemisphere, it causes nosocomial infections only. Its presence in this type of infection can be explained by its very high capacity to acquire antibiotic resistance. The situation is different in tropical countries, where A. baumannii is found in community-acquired infections (contracted outside of hospital). These infections are essentially pneumonias associated with bacteremia (presence of bacteria in blood) and are found in alcoholic patients.
We are sequencing the genome of two A. baumannii strains. The first one, named VEB, is representative of nosocomial strains. It is responsible for a hospital epidemic, associated with high mortality, that broke out in the north of France. The VEB strain is antibiotic multiresistant. The second strain, named SDF, is responsible for community-acquired infections. It belongs to a group of new A. baumannii
strains which have been found to have high sensitivity to antibiotics. These strains were isolated from the interior of body lice collected on homeless people living in France. Given that the louse interior is usually sterile, the presence of these strains can only be due to cryptic bacteremic episodes.
It will be interesting to compare the genomes of a nosocomial, multiresistant strain and a community-acquired, multisensitive strain, in order to identify the factors responsible for their adaptation to very different environments and their different pathogenic potential.

Why sequence another Bacillus cereus strain?
Bacteria of the group cereus are ubiquitous and usually isolated from soil. However, these microorganisms are the real predators and from time-to-time can be isolated from dead insects or even animals, those deaths they were the cause.
Bacillus cereus is an acronym for the large group of bacteria which includes B. thuringiensis (insect killer), B. anthracis (animal killer), B. weihenstephanensis (able to grow in cold soil), B. mycoides (forming filaments). If no one of the above properties is detected, the Bacillus of this group is usually labeled by a neutral name B. cereus.
The bacteria of this group is now attracting increasing interest of researchers working on bacilli and other gram-positive bacteria. One of the fundamental and practical questions is how the ecological adaptation of these bacteria produces lines pathogenic for animals and insects (like B. anthracis or some B. thuringiensis lines). Intensive phylogenetic studies revealed the epidemic structure of this bacterial population. Some strains of B. cereus are non-hazardous (such strains are used as animal probiotics), other strains caused food poisoning, either emetic or diarrheic.

Gathering such data will certainly inspire new ideas about the short time evolution of these bacteria, which should allow scientists to predict, and if necessary to stop, its potential pathogenic emergence.

Genomic signatures of food-associated Enterococci
Enterococci (Group D Streptococci by Lancefild serological classification) are widely spread in the nature and show a large spectrum of interactions with the host. They are commensal occupants of the intestinal tract of humans and animals, are used in preparation of certain types of cheese and sausage, but also are recognised as casual agents in many foodborn and life-threatening nosocomial infections. This group is under intensive survey since identification of Vancomycin Resistant Enterococci (VRE) as one of most important nosocomial pathogens of the 1990's, including comprehensive genetic approaches as MLST and genome sequencing. Following the first genome sequencing of E. faecalis (Paulsen et al, 2003) genomes of other clinical isolates of two E. faecalis and three E. faecium strains are now being sequenced.
E. faecium, an ubiquitous colonizer of humans and animals, has evolved in the last 15 years from an avirulent commensal to the third most frequently isolated nosocomial pathogen among intensive care unit patients in the United States. But little is known about the evolution and virulence of E. faecium, and genomic studies are hampered by the absence of a completely annotated genome sequence (Leavis et al,2007).

Coliscope: a sequencing project for the understanding of commensalism and virulence emergence in the Escherichia coli/Shigella species
The bacterial species E. coli/Shigella has both the characteristics to be (i) composed of natural isolates with various lifestyles and (ii) a laboratory model organism.
E. coli is an inhabitant of the gut microbiota of vertebrates, including humans, as well as a pathogen frequently involved in a broad spectrum of intestinal and extraintestinal diseases. In humans, E. coli and Shigella are responsible worldwide for some of the most common and severe infectious diseases, including diarrhoea, urinary tract infections, sepsis and neonatal meningitis (Donnenberg 2002). Furthermore, E. coli is the one of the most common etiologic agent of nosocomial infections. E. coli is also a model organism for which an extensive knowledge of its molecular biology and physiology has been accumulated.
The genetic population structure of E. coli is globally clonal. Phylogenetic analysis has shown that the species is composed of five main phylogenetic groups (A, B1, E, D and B2). Pathogenic E. coli strains are derived from commensal strains by several mechanisms, including acquisition of "virulence" operons, inactivation of genes and allelic variations. However, the role of the chromosomal genetic background in pathogenicity is attested to by the observed link between the type of pathology and the phylogenetic groups of the species (Escobar-Paramo et al., 2004a). Thus, it is mandatory to know the commensal genomic diversity to understand the emergence of the virulence. Up to now, genome sequencing projects have been concentrated on pathogenic strains, with the exception of the laboratory adapted E. coli K12 strain, which is not representative of the species diversity. In addition, the closest sequenced genomes available today for genomic comparison are from the species Salmonella enterica, which has diverged 120-160 millions years ago (Ochman and Wilson, 1987). This long divergence time renders the comparative analyses difficult to interpret.
The Genoscope will sequence the genomes of two commensal and four pathogenic human
The Genoscope will sequence the genomes of two commensal and four pathogenic human E. coli strains spanning an evolutionary time around 40 millions of years, as well as the one of the type strain of the E. fergusonii species, the closest E. coli related species. The list of the sequenced strains with their main characteristics is given below.
Two strains of the B1phylogenetic group:
Two strains of the D phylogenetic group representing the two major D sub groups:
Two strains of the B2 phylogenetic group:
Strain ATCC 35469T, the type strain of the E. fergusonii species. This strain is not virulent in the extra-intestinal mouse model. E. fergusonii strains have been isolated from human and animal, sometimes in pathogenic conditions (Farmer et al., 1985).
The strains will be available
The strains will be available at the collection de l'Institut Pasteur (IAI 1, IAI 39, ED1a, S88, 55989) or the ATCC (E. fergusonii, UMN026).
As the gene content is very variable among E. coli species, the newly described genes will enrich the E. coli gene pool. Taking into account the E. coli/Shigella genome projects led by other groups, the scientific community will have the unique opportunity to have 19 genomes from a single species for comparative genomics.

Comparative genomics to understand virulence in humans
Legionella are environmental bacteria able to cause a human infection, legionellosis. Epidemiological data indicate, that only some isolates are responsible for clinical cases. Among the 48 Legionella species described to date, L. pneumophila seems to have a higher virulence, as it is responsible for 90% of the cases. Within this species, there are 15 serogroups described but serogroup 1 is implicated in 80% of human legionellosis.
We are thus determining and analysing the complete genome sequence of two L. pneumophila isolates of serogoup 1. One strain is a newly emerging epidemic strain in France and the other one is a L. pneumophila serogroup 1 isolate present since several years in the water system of a French hospital. Although L. pneumophila is described as being responsible for nosocomial infections, this strain was never implicated in disease. The epidemiological information will be the key issues in the analysis and comparison of the two isolates, and of those of the three known genome sequences of clinical, virulent isolates (Chien et al., 2004; Cazalet et al., 2004) to identify genes important in human infection.

An opportunistic bacterium which causes genital infections
General information about Mycoplasmas
Mycoplasma hominis is a bacterium from the urogenital area which is pathogenic for humans. This species belongs to the group of mycoplasmas sensu lato, or Mollicutes ("soft skin"), bacteria which are characterized by the absence of a cell wall. The Mollicutes (about 200 species) are rooted in the bacterial taxon of Gram-positive bacteria with low G+C content, or Firmicutes ("hard skin"), which possess a thick cell wall. The loss of this cell wall is thus a derived character state for Mollicutes, which, within the Firmicutes, are related to the Clostridia and the Bacilli. These last two groups are probably paraphyletic.

The reduction in size of mycoplasmal genomes is thought to be related to the life style of these bacteria, in close contact with their host. They are either commensals or pathogens, some of which arefacultative intracellular parasites. They are found in both animals (including humans and insects) and plants (Spiroplasmas and Phytoplasmas). The adoption of an parasitic life style, based on harnessing of the resources of the host cell, means that numerous metabolic functions are no longer needed. Mycoplasmas synthesize indeed few precursors de novo, and the loss of genes for numerous biosynthetic pathways has been noted in the genomes of the mycoplasmas that have been sequenced to date. The majority of mycoplasmas have less than 1000 genes. M. pulmonis, for example has only 782 genes, compared with 4100 for the related firmicute bacterium Bacillus subtilis. The loss of the cell wall may also be related to intracellular endoparasitism.
The mycoplasmas, most of which are host-specific, cause chronic diseases with slow progression in humans and animals. Human mycoplasmoses are found in diverse diseases of the respiratory and urogenital tracts. Mycoplasmoses which affect farm animals cause considerable economic loss. Antibiotic treatment often fails to eradicate these bacteria. As for other pathogens, it is hoped that the availability of complete genomic sequences will lead to a better understanding of the physiology, pathogenic potential and host specificity of mycoplasmas, and to the development of new prevention and treatment strategies. The large number of sequenced genomes from mycoplasma species makes comparative genomics strategies especially valuable for the prediction of pathogenicity regions and for the comprehension of the evolution of a very diverse group (in terms of pathogenicity, host specificity and also morphology and nutritional requirements). The Molligen database, which is maintained at the CBiB (Bordeaux 2 University), is dedicated to the comparative genomics of mycoplasmas.
Description of Mycoplasma hominis
Mycoplasma hominis is one of the four mycoplasma species - along with M. pneumoniae, M. genitalium and Ureaplasma urealyticum - for which the pathogenic potential in humans is certain. Of these four species, M. hominis is the only one for which the genomic sequence is not yet known. M. hominis is an opportunistic mycoplasma which, like Ureaplasma urealyticum, may form part of the commensal urogenital flora of the adult. This is the mycoplasma species which has the highest probability of being implicated in genital infections in women. M. hominis may also cause infections of the newborn and extragenital infections, especially in immunodepressed subjects. The molecular bases of the pathogenic potential of M. hominis remain largely unknown.
Phylogenetically, M. hominis belongs to the same group as M. pulmonis, M. agalactiae (genomes sequenced at Genoscope), M. mobile and M. hyopneumoniae (genomes sequenced as of Spring 2005; those of other species from this group such as M. arthritidis, M. orale and M. fermentans, are currently being sequenced). The comparison of the genomic sequence of
M. hominis (PG21 strain) with those of these closely related species should lead to a better understanding of the molecular bases of host specificity. This comparison will be extended to genomic sequences of other human pathogens (M. pneumoniae, M. genitalium, M. penetrans and U. urealyticum) which belong to a different phylogenetic group, in order to identify new factors for virulence and ecological niches.
The available sequence data is limited in M. hominis; this includes data on housekeeping genes, and on membrane lipoproteins - some of which possess adhesion properties - that display antigenic variations. Such hypervariable systems are frequent in mycoplasmas. Furthermore, M. hominis has an unusual type of energy metabolism, based only on the degradation of arginine, which was not found in the other mycoplasmas which have already been sequenced; a knowledge of M. hominis genome will open the way to interesting metabolic reconstitutions. More generally, access to this sequence will provide fundamental insights into the biology of a bacterium which is capable of penetrating the interior of human cells.
A knowledge of the genome of M. hominis will also facilitate the analysis of various strains : clinical isolates from different parts of the human body, antibiotic-resistant mutants (from in vivo or in vitro sources) and products of random mutagenesis by transposition. It will also facilitate the inactivation of genes of interest.

The "mycoides group", causative agents of animal diseases all over the world
The six species of mycoplasmas which belong to the "mycoides group" (M. mycoides ssp mycoides SC (MmmSC), M. mycoides ssp mycoides LC (MmmLC), M. mycoides ssp capri (Mmc), M. capricolum ssp capricolum (Mcc), M. capricolum ssp capripneumonia (Mccp), M. sp Group 7 of Leach (Mg7) are all pathogens of ruminants. Two of these (MmmSC and Mccp) are responsible for diseases from list A and B of the goose, which have been eradicated in most developed countries. The others are widely distributed in the world, and they cause diverse syndromes in ruminants characterized by mammitis, arthritis, keratitis, pneumonia and septicemia.
Large economic losses occur on affected farms, and although antibiotics may reduce economic losses, they do not eradicate the infection.
The comparative study of mycoplasmal genomes from this "mycoides group" will be very interesting from a fundamental point of view because each species has a specific tropism, either for a given species (cattle or goat), or for a specific organ (lung for MmmSC, mammary gland for MmmLC).
Comparative genomics applied to the complete genomes of the ensemble of the "mycoides group", will make it possible to better understand their phylogeny and to identify the genes implicated in their pathogenic capacities.
Furthermore, this group is phylogenetically very close to Spiroplasma citri and S. kunkelii, plant pathogens for which sequencing is in progress, which will enhance the value of comparative genomic studies, which is the essential basis for the developoment of diagnostic techniques.

A model pathogen for Drosophila
The insects posses a very efficient immune system which presents strong similarity with the mechanisms implicated in the innate (non-adaptive) immune system of mammals. In response to microbial aggression, the fat body of the insect (analogous to the mammalian liver) synthesizes a whole battery of peptides with strong antibacterial and antifungal activity.
The study in progress aims to identify bacterial strains which can naturally infect Drosophila, and characterize the mechanisms implicated in the phenomenon of pathogenicity. After looking at bacteria from decomposing fruit, adult Drosophila or dead larvae, a bacterial species which not only induces a strong immune response but also is lethal for Drosophila has been isolated, Pseudomonas L48. Sequencing of its 16S rRNA revealed that this strain belongs to the Pseudomonas putida group, and is closely related to Pseudomonas mosselii.
Bacteria from the genus Pseudomonas are characterized by great phenotypic, genomic and genetic diversity. These bacteria are capable of utilizing numerous organic compounds as carbon sources. Furthermore, some strains are resistant to many antibiotics, a phenomenon which is amplified by pharmacologic selection. Numerous species are pathogenic for organisms like humans (P. aeruginosa) or plants (P. fluorescens).
With the genetic tools available for Pseudomonas bacteria, an analysis of the factors involved in infection and pathogenicity of this bacterium has been undertaken. This research was initiated by developing a method of random mutagenesis by using derivatives of the Tn5 transposon. A total of 2,500 clones have been tested to date, making it possible to select 21 independent mutants; we estimate that this mutagenesis will provide about 50 mutants which are affected in their interactions with Drosophila. A study of the regulation of the physiological processes implicated in the interactions between the host and its parasite will facilitate the characterization of virulence factors in this important group of pathogens, as well as the identification of their targets in Drosophila. The determination of the complete sequence of the genome of this strain will help considerably in the genetic analysis of this bacterium, and will also lead to the development of genomic tools for the study of the phylogenetic relationships between this strain with other Pseudomonaceae.

Whole genome shotgun
Rickettsia conorii is the infectious agent which causes fievre boutonneuse (Mediterranean fever) in man. This disease is an eruptive fever transmitted by the bite of the brown dog tick.
Rickettsia conorii is an obligate intracellular parasite which multiplies in the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells; its genome has a size of 1.2 Mb. These bacteria have been closely associated with arthropods for several hundred million years. Rickettsia conorii is a similar but distinct species from Rickettsia prowazeki, which has already been sequenced; it belongs to the alpha branch of proteobacteria, as defined by comparison of 16S RNA sequences.

The principal inhabitant of the human oral cavity
Streptococcus salivarius is the principal commensal bacterium of the oral cavity in healthy humans. It is the first bacterium which colonizes the dental plaque, before being joined by numerous other species of various genera. It therefore seems to be the pioneer in colonizing dental plaque, creating favorable conditions for the implantation of other species, but also a bacterium which plays the role of moderator, permitting the implantation of bacteria which are harmful to the health of the oral cavity. Finally, this bacterium is sometimes found in opportunistic infections, most commonly after surgical procedures.
It therefore seems important to increase our understanding of this bacterium which interacts with its host in a complex manner. A better knowledge of the molecular and physiologic factors which allow it to colonize dental plaque and to interact with other species will help in designing strategies for the prevention of cavities, especially in children. Furthermore, a knowledge of the characteristics of strains which are isolated in opportunistic infections may help diminish risk by early detection in the most sensitive subjects and in medical personnel.

Desulfovibrio vulgaris
Desulfovibrio vulgaris breaks down metals and can corrode machinery, it also breaks down pollutants and could potentially clean up environmental toxins
Desulfovibrio vulgaris is a Gram-negative , anaerobic, non-spore forming, curved rod-shaped bacteria, 0.7 um in cell diameter, isolated from soil, animal intestines and feces, and fresh and salt water. 

Treponema pallidum
Treponema pallidum causes Syphilis
Treponema pallidum is the causative agent of syphilis. Syphilis is characterised by multiple clinical stages and long periods of latent, asymptomatic infection. The primary infection is localised, but organisms rapidly disseminate and cause manifestations throughout the body. Veneral syphilis was first diagnosed as early as the 1400's and although effective therapies have been available since the introduction of penicillin, syphilis remains an important global health problem. The organism is a spirochete, a helical to sinusoidal bacterium with outer and cytoplasmic membranes, a thin peptidoglycan layer and flagella that lie in the periplasmic space and extend from both ends toward the middle of the organism. T. pallidum is an obligate human parasite that cannot be cultured continuously in vitro. As the mechanism of pathogenesis is poorly understood, existing diagnostic tests for syphilis are suboptimal and no vaccine against T. pallidum is available.

Ureaplasma urealyticum
Ureaplasma parvum causes human urogenital tract infections
Ureaplasma parvum is a mycoplasma and a pathogenic ureolytic mollicute which colonises the urogenital tracts of humans. It is an an opportunistic pathogen that is a significant cause of adverse pregnancy outcome, neonatal disease, and supperative arthritis. During delivery it can also spread to the central nervous system and lower respiratory tract of newborn infants resulting in infant pneumonia, meningitis, and septicemia. U. parvum and other mycoplasma have lost the cell wall of their ancestors, and in fact, are the smallest free-living organisms known. Although Mycoplasma genitalium boasts a smaller genome than the 750,000 base pairs of U. parvum, the latter may rely upon a more minimal set of essential genes to function. The bacterium uniquely lacks several proteins standard in comparable organisms and its low biosynthetic capacity means that it must import more nutrients needed for growth that most other bacteria. Only some of the 14 known serotypes (serovars) of U. parvum are involved in disease.

Vibrio cholerae
Vibrio cholerae causes Cholera
Vibrios are facultatively anaerobic bacteria that are metabolically similar to the Enterobacteriaceae. They are ubiquitous to oceans, coastal waters, and estuaries. The best known species is Vibrio cholerae, which can cause severe diarrheal illness in humans. The genus Vibrio consists of Gram-negative straight or curved rods, motile by means of a single polar flagellum. Vibrios are capable of both respiratory and fermentative metabolism. Classic cholera is characterised by an abrupt onset of vomiting and profuse watery diaorrhea. Fluid losses can be significant (up to 20 L/day) and hypovolemic shock and metabolic acidosis can cause death within a few hours of onset, especially in children. Mortality, in untreated cases, is as high as 60%. In the past 180 years, 7 pandemics were reported, usually of Bengali origin, with the latest pandemic originating in Indonesia in 1961 and moving to the Western hemisphere. In 1991, a cholera outbreak in Peru and 20 other countries in the Western hemisphere accounted for over 600,000 cases with 5000 deaths. The complete genome of Vibrio cholerae consists of two circular chromosomes. The majority of recognisable genes for essential cell functions (e.g., DNA replication, transcription, translation, etc.) and pathogenicity (e.g., toxin, surface antigens, and adhesion) are located on the large chromosome. The small chromosome contains a large percentage of hypothetical genes, more genes that appear to have origins other than the Proteobacteria and a gene capture system (integron island) that suggests this may have been a megaplasmid captured by an ancestral Vibrio species. The Vibrio cholerae genome sequences provide a starting point for understanding how a free living, environmental microorganism is also a human pathogen.

Vibrio fischeri
Vibrio fischeri causes luminescence in certain marine species
Vibrio fischeri belongs to the Vibrionaceae, a large family of marine gamma-proteobacteria that includes several dozen species known to engage in a diversity of beneficial or pathogenic interactions with animal tissue. There are a small number of pathogenic Vibrio species that cause human diseases, those which have had their genomes sequenced are Vibrio cholerae, Vibrio parahaemolyticus, and Vibrio vulnificus. Nonpathogenic members of the genus Vibrio, including a number of beneficial symbionts, make up the majority of the Vibrionaceae, but to date none of these species has been similarly examined. Vibrio fischeri is found in several niches in the marine environment and exists naturally either in a free-living planktonic state or as a symbiont of certain luminescent fish or squid. It is perhaps best known as the specific symbiont in the light-emitting organs of certain species of squids and fishes. specifically the bobtail squid, Euprymna scolopes. The bacteria colonise specialised light organs in the fish or squid, which cause them to bioluminesce. Luminescence in the fish or squid is thought to be involved in the attraction of prey or even as camouflage. During the nocturnal feeding of the squid Euprymna scolopes, luminescence from the light organ is directed towards the sea floor and is modulated by the squid to match the intensity of moonlight, therefore preventing a shadow of the squid on the sea floor. The source of the luminescence is the bacteria themselves. In the marine environment, the bacteria only luminesce when colonising the light organs and do not emit light when in the free-living state. It makes good evolutionary sense for the bacteria to tightly regulate bioluminescence as the mechanism by which light is produced is very energy intensive. The ability of V. fischeri cells to produce bioluminescence results from the expression of the lux operon, a small cluster of genes that have been well studied in this organism, and have been adapted to many uses in biotechnology. V. fischeri is also the bacterium in which acyl-homoserine lactone 'quorum sensing' was first discovered and described. Analysis of this sequence has revealed surprising parallels with V. cholerae and other pathogens.

Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Vibrio parahaemolyticus causes food-borne gastroenteritis
Vibrios are facultatively anaerobic bacteria that are metabolically similar to the Enterobacteriaceae. They are ubiquitous to oceans, coastal waters, and estuaries. Vibrio parahaemolyticus is a Gram-negative bacillus from same family as those that cause cholera. It naturally inhabits coastal waters and is present in higher concentrations during summer; it is a halophilic, or salt-requiring organism. Vibrio parahaemolyticus causes food-borne gastroenteritis, which inflames the stomach and small intestine. Most people recover completely from the illness by drinking plenty of fluids. The bacterial pathogen is a growing concern in North America, particularly in places where seafood is popular. Less commonly, this organism can cause an infection in the skin when an open wound is exposed to warm seawater.

Vibrio vulnificus
Vibrio vulnicus causes potentially fatal food poisoning
Vibrio vulnificus is a a lactose-fermenting, halophilic, Gram-negative , opportunistic pathogenic bacterium from the same family as those that cause cholera. It normally lives in warm seawater and is part of a group of vibrios that are called "halophilic" because they are salt requiring organisms. This organism causes wound infections, gastroenteritis, or a syndrome known as primary septicemia. Found in warm coastal waters, this bacterium is related to the cholera pathogen and can cause a severe and potentially fatal illness. Infections tend to occur through eating raw or improperly cooked shellfish, particularly oysters. The ingestion of V. vulnificus by healthy individuals can result in gastroenteritis. The "primary septicemia" form of the disease can follow. Wound infections result either from contaminating an open wound with sea water harboring the organism, or by lacerating part of the body on coral, fish, etc., followed by contamination with the organism . Perso ns who are immunocompromised, especially those with chronic liver disease, are more at risk from Vibrio vulnificus. There is no evidence for person-to-person transmission.

Wolbachia
Wolbachia (endosymbiont of Drosophila melanogaster) is unable to live outside another organism, and ensures its survival by manipulating the reproduction of its hosts, even to the point of determining their sex
Wolbachia, which are found in a variety of invertebrate species, are of great interest due to their diverse interactions with different hosts, which range from many forms of reproductive parasitism to mutualistic symbioses. Wolbachia are intracellular gram-negative bacteria that are found in association with a variety of invertebrate species, including insects, mites, spiders, terrestrial crustaceans, and nematodes. Wolbachia are transovarialy transmitted from females to their offspring and are extremely widespread, having been found to infect 20%-75% of invertebrate species. Wolbachia, a bacterial endosymbiont of diverse arthropods, affects its host's reproduction and so is consequential for its host's fitness. In the fruit fly host interactions are complex and range from mutualistic to pathogenic, depending on the combination of host and Wolbachia involved. Most striking are the various forms of "reproductive parasitism" that serve to alter host reproduction in order to enhance the transmission of this maternally inherited agent. These include parthenogenesis (infected females reproducing in the absence of mating to produce infected female offspring), feminization (infected males being converted into functional phenotypic females), male-killing (infected male embryos being selectively killed), and cytoplasmic incompatibility (in its simplest form, the developmental arrest of offspring of uninfected females when mated to infected males). Analysis of the genome, in particular phylogenomic comparisons with other intracellular bacteria, has revealed many insights into the biology and evolution of Wolbachia. For example, the genome is unique among sequenced obligate intracellular species in both being highly streamlined and containing very high levels of repetitive DNA and mobile DNA elements. This observation, coupled with multiple evolutionary reconstructions, suggests that natural selection is somewhat inefficient, most likely owing to the occurrence of repeated population bottlenecks. Genome analysis predicts many metabolic differences with the closely related Rickettsia species, including the presence of intact glycolysis and purine synthesis, which may compensate for an inability to obtain ATP directly from its host, as Rickettsia can. Other discoveries include the apparent inability of Wolbachia to synthesize lipopolysaccharide. Despite the ability of Wolbachia to infect the germline of its host, no evidence has yet been found for either recent lateral gene transfer between Wolbachia and D. melanogaster or older transfers between Wolbachia and any host. Evolutionary analysis further supports the hypothesis that mitochondria share a common ancestor with the alpha-Proteobacteria, but shows little support for the grouping of mitochondria with species in the order Rickettsiales.

Wolbachia
Wolbachia (endosymbiont of Brugia malayi) can cause feminization of genetic males in the host species
Wolbachia are Gram-negative bacteria that form intracellular inherited infections in many invertebrates. In the process of analyzing the Brugia malayi genome as part of the Filarial Genome Project it was observed that these worms contained Wolbachia, obligate intracellular alpha-proteobacteria which are present in all human and many animal filarial parasites. Related organisms are present in up to 70% of arthropod species. In arthropods, the Wolbachia have been shown to cause reproductive abnormalities in their hosts, leading to aberrant sex ratios, reciprocal cross sterility (cytoplasmic incompatibilities), parthenogenesis and feminization of genetic males. Wolbachia have been observed in the majority of parasitic filarial nematodes and these endosymbionts appear to play important roles in the biology of the host. Wolbachia are therefore promising targets for development of vaccines against filarial infections. Genomic sequence will hopefully provide information to enable the development of appropriate therapeutics Many devastating diseases in tropical areas of the world are the result of infection with parasites. A recent World Health Organization (WHO) report on the leading causes of death world-wide shows that 1/3 are due to infectious and parasitic diseases. In many tropical and subtropical areas, the prevalence of parasitic infections is on the rise due to rapid and unplanned growth of cities, which creates additional breeding sites for the mosquitoes that transmit the parasites responsible for malaria and filariasis. Effective control of these diseases requires repeated administration of potent drugs and continuous efforts to reduce vector insect populations. Filariasis is caused by several different species of parasitic nematodes that are transmitted to humans by insect vectors. Collectively, the various species of filarial parasites are estimated to infect approximately 150 million people worldwide, and over 1 billion people live in areas where filariasis is common. While filarial infection is rarely life-threatening, it causes chronic suffering, social stigma and disability. The degree of disability resulting from infection greatly hinders the ability to work and the economic impact of this disease is considerable. Brugia malayi is a filarial nematode with widespread distribution in South and South East Asia. It is transmitted via the bite of blood-feeding mosquitoes. The parasite resides in the lymphatic system and is a cause of lymphatic filariasis. In the later stages of infection, the disease is characterised by a disfiguring condition known as elephantiasis.

Xanthomonas axonopodis
Xanthomonas axonopodis is a plant pathogen that causes citrus canker in citrus fruits
The genus Xanthomonas, a Gram-negative aerobic rod, is a diverse and economically important group of bacterial phytopathogens, belonging to the gamma-subdivision of the Proteobacteria. Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Xac) is the causal agent of citrus canker, a serious disease that affects most commercial citrus cultivars with significant economic impact on citrus production worldwide. Symptoms of the disease include canker lesions on fruits, leaves and stems, leading to the shedding of fruit and leaves, twig dieback, and general tree decline. Infection is dramatically enhanced by the presence of the citrus leaf miner (Phyllocnistis citrella), which forms galleries by its feeding habit in the foliar mesophyll. This brings about the spreading of canker infection in many plants that would otherwise be considered tolerant. Researchers have sequenced two major plant pathogens of the genus Xanthomonas, each species preys on different crops and infects plants in different ways, but the two genomes have 80 percent of their genes in common. Comparative analysis between the two Xanthomonas strains allows possible identification of a set of strain-specific genes, some of which are probably responsible for the distinct pathogenicity and host specificity profiles of these organisms.

Xanthomonas oryzae
Xanthomonas oryzae causes bacterial leaf blight in rice
Xanthomonas oryzae are Gram-negative rods, capsulated and motile with a polar flagellum and is the causal agent of bacterial blight on rice ( Oryza sativa L.). Bacterial blight disease is a major rice disease in tropical Asian countries where high-yielding rice cultivars are often highly susceptible to the disease. It is a vascular disease resulting in tannish-gray to white lesions along the leaf veins. In severely infested fields, the disease can cause yield losses as high as 50%

Yersinia pestis
Yersinia pestis causes bubonic plague
Yersinia pestis, the Gram-negative coccobacillus belonging to the Enterobacteriaceae is the causative agent of plague and is arguably the deadliest pathogen in history. At least 200 million deaths have been attributed to this disease in modern times. Yersinia pestis was named after Andre Yersin the French bacteriologist sent by Institute Pasteur to the Far East (Hong Kong) to study plague where he first isolated plague bacillus in 1894. Yersinia pestis is primarily a rodent pathogen, with humans being an accidental host when bitten by an infected rat flea. The flea draws viable Y. pestis organisms into its intestinal tract. These organisms multiply in the flea and block the flea's proventriculus (digestive chamber). Some Y. pestis in the flea are then regurgitated when the flea gets its next blood meal thus transferring the infection to a new host. Within hours of the initial flea bite, the infection spills out into the bloodstream, leading to involvement of the liver, spleen, and lungs. The patient develops a severe bacterial pneumonia, exhaling large numbers of viable organisms into the air during coughing fits. 50 to 60 percent of untreated patients will die if untreated. As the epidemic of bubonic plague develops (especially under conditions of severe overcrowding, malnutrition, and heavy flea infestation), it eventually shifts into a predominately pneumonic form, which is far more difficult to control and which has 100 percent mortality. The sequencing has revealed Y. pestis to be a highly dynamic and adaptable pathogen that has undergone rapid genetic changes. It appears to have evolved in a remarkably short time from a relatively harmless stomach bug to a blood-borne pathogen. Over time, Y. pestis acquired genes from other bacteria and viruses that allowed it to live in the blood instead of the intestine, altogether, the researchers identified 21 regions, or adaptation islands, that were probably acquired from other organisms. Conversely, gene acquisition has been balanced by gene loss. 149 deactivated genes, or pseudogenes, were discovered, that once enabled Y. pestis to thrive in the human gut, but are no longer needed in the new environment. These include genes associated with adhesion, mobility and colonization of the gut.

Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis is a human pathogen, commonly causing pseudoappendicitis
The genus Yersinia has grown to include eleven species, three of which are potentially pathogenic to humans: Y . pestis , Y . pseudotuberculosis , and Y . enterocolitica. Y. pseudotuberculosis is a Gram-negative coccobacillus belonging to the family Enterobacteriaceae. Isolated first in 1883 by Malassez and Vignal the organism received numerous names before being included in the genus Yersinia. The designation pseudotuberculosis derives from the characteristic histopathological aspect found in mesenteric lymph nodes of lymphoid hyperplasia cases which closely resemble those observed during tuberculosis infection. Y. pseudotuberculosis is widely spread in the environment (soil, water, vegetables, etc). This bacterium is a primary pathogen of wild and domestic animals in all continents. Nearly all animal species are potential carriers of Y. pseudotuberculosis and asymptomatic carriage can evolve into a fulminating and fatal infection when the animals are subjected to stress (famine, cold temperatures, etc.). The disease is transmitted by the feco-oral route. In humans, Y. pseudotuberculosis infections are not frequent although outbreaks associated with consumption of water or food supplies contaminated with animal faeces are reported. Humans develop varying degrees of illness, from abdominal pain and fever to septicaemia, but a mesenteric adenitis that mimics an acute appendicular syndrome (pseudoappendicitis) is the most common clinical presentation. In most instances, the infection is self-limiting and can be effectively treated with antibiotic therapy. A striking characteristic of Y. pseudotuberculosis is the high degree of sequence identity to Y. pestis (the causative agent of plague) which is intriguing given the markedly different epidemiological and clinical features of the two species. In this regards, it should be noted that Y. pestis has been proposed to be a recently emerged clone of Y. pseudotuberculosis (Achtman et al. 1999). A primary goal of the present Y. pseudotuberculosis sequencing project is to enable the gene by gene comparison of these two closely related organisms to gain insight into the molecular bases that underlie their dramatically different clinical symptoms and mechanism of transmission.

Bacillus
Bacillus anthracis
Description and Significance
Genome Structure
To date there are currently or have been 25 genome projects on Bacillus. Including:
The sequence for the genome of Bacillus subtilis was completed in 1997 and was the first published sequence for a single-living bacterium. The genome is 4.2 Mega-base pairs long with 4,100 protein-coding regions. Bacillus subtilis has a plant growth promoting rhizobacterium shown to synthesize antifungal peptides. This ability has lead to the use of B. subtilis in biocontrol. B. subtilis has been shown to increase crop yields, although it has not been shown whether this is because it enhances plant growth, or inhibits disease growth.
The genome of Bacillus anthracis is 5,227,293 base pairs long with 5,508 predicted protein-coding regions. The genome of B. anthracis is highly homologous with the genomes of both B. cereus and B. thuringiensis which have also been sequenced. The genome of B. anthracis has only 141 proteins that do not have a match in the protein set of B. cereus. Almost all of the virulence factors associated with anthrax are coded on its two plasmids and, surprisingly, almost all of these genes have homologues in B. cereus. This suggests that these virulence-enhancing genes are not specifically unique to Bacillus anthracis, but rather are part of the common array of genes of the B. cereus group (of which B. anthracis, B. cereus, and B. thuringiensis are all a part). B. anthracis also seems to have a decreased capacity for the extensive carbohydrate metabolism seen in B. subtilis, but possesses the genes for the cleavage of extracellular chitin and chitosan, which confirms its close relationship with the insect pathogen B. thuringiensis.

Ecology
Due to the metabolic diversity in the genus Bacillus, bacilli are able to colonize a variety of habitats ranging from soil and insects to humans. Bacillus thuringiensis parasitizes insects, and is commercially used for pest control. Although the most well known of the bacilli are the pathogenic species, most Bacillus are saprophytes that make their living off of decaying matter. Still others, namely Bacillus subtilis, inhabit the rhizosphere, which is the interface between plant roots and the surrounding soil. The plants roots and associated biofilm can have a significant effect on the chemistry of the soil, creating a unique environment. It has recently been shown that Bacillus subtilis engages in cannibalism. They use cannibalism as the easy way out in extreme cases. For survival in harsh environments, bacilli can form spores, but it is very costly to them energy-wise. An easier way is for the bacteria to produce antibiotics that destroy neighboring bacilli, so that their contents may be digested allowing for the survival of a few of the bacteria. Essentially, what they are doing is snacking on their fellow bacilli, to tide them over, hoping for the environment to pick back up.
Pathology
Bacilli cause an array of infections from ear infections to meningitis, and urinary tract infections to septicemia. Mostly they occur as secondary infections in immunodeficient hosts or otherwise compromised hosts. They may exacerbate previous infection by producing tissue-damaging toxins or metabolites that interfere with treatment.
The most well known disease caused by bacilli is anthrax, caused by Bacillus anthracis. Anthrax has a long history with humans. It has been suggested that the fifth and sixth plagues of Egypt recorded in the Bible (the fifth attacking animals, the sixth, known as the plague of the boils, attacking humans). In the 1600s anthrax was known as the "Black bane" and killed over 60,000 cows. Anthrax has more recently been brought to our attention as a possible method for bioterrorism. The recent anthrax mailings have brought acute public attention to the issue and sparked extensive research into the devastating disease.
Anthrax is primarily a disease of herbivores who acquire the bacterium by eating plants with dust that contains anthrax spores. Humans contract the disease in three different ways. Cutaneous anthrax occurs when a human comes into contact with the spores form dust particles or a contaminated animal or carcass through a cut or abrasion. Cutaneous anthrax accounts for 95% of anthrax cases worldwide. During a 2-3 day incubation period the spores germinate, vegetative cells multiply, and a papule develops. Over the following days the papule ulcerates, dries and blackens to form the characteristic eschar. The process is painless unless infected with another pathogen.
Gastrointestinal anthrax is contracted by ingesting contaminated meat. It occurs in the intestinal mucosa when the organisms invade the mucosa through a preexisting lesions. It progresses the same way as cutaneous anthrax. Although it is extremely rare in developed countries, it has a very high mortality rate.
Pulmonary anthrax is the result of inhaled spores that are transported to the lymph nodes where they germinate and multiply. They are then taken into the blood stream and lymphatics culminating in systemic arthritis which is usually fatal.
Phages
Due to the danger of anthrax being used in biological weapons, research has been put into other methods, besides the highly controversial vaccine, to defend against the deadly disease. A recently discovered bacteriophage, the gamma phage, attacks Bacillus anthracis, and researches are optimistic about its clinical application. The bacteriophage is highly selective, and is extremely effective in lysing B. anthracis cells, while ignoring those of its closely related counterparts B. cereus and B. thuringiensis. The gamma phage has been over 80% effective in treating infected mice that were in the late stages of the disease, essentially rescuing them from almost certain death. There is the obvious concern that anthrax will develop strains that are immune to this treatment, and we will be right back where we started. Researchers say that this is unlikely because the only way to evade this predator would be a mutational change in cell wall structure to prevent the virus from binding, and this would kill the bacterium.
Medicine
Despite the pathogenic capabilities of some bacilli, many other species are used in medical and pharmaceutical processes. These take advantage of the bacteria's ability to synthesize certain proteins and antibiotics. Bacitracin and plymixin, two ingredients in Neosporin, are products of bacilli. Also, innocuous Bacillus microbes are useful for studying the virulent bacillus species that are closely related. B. subtilis has multiple carbohydrate pathways, representing the variety of carbohydrates found in the soil.

Burkholderia pseudomallei
Description and significance
Burkholderia pseudomallei is a gram-negative bacterium with dimensions 2-5 microm in length and .4-.8 microm in diameter in the shape of a rod. This bacterium is aerobic and has a flagellum that provides motility. It found in the soil and water and is endemic to Southeast Asia and Northern Australia. Its optimal growth occurs at the temperature of 40 degrees C and a neutral or slightly acidic pH. Burkholderia pseudomallei is significant in its role of causing a disease known as melioidosis, which currently doesn't have a vaccine.


Pathology
Burkholderia pseudomallei is a human and animal pathogen and is the cause of melioidosis, which is a disease native to Southeast Asia and northern Australia. It releases exo and endo toxins but their role in instigating the symptoms of melioidosis is not yet fully understood. Nevertheless, infection is spread through ingestion or contact of bacteria onto open skin wounds or through the inhalation of the aerosolized Burkholderia pseudomallei. Melioidosis can be classified as acute or chronic depending on the incubation time before symptoms appear. Burkholderia pseudomallei mimics tuberculosis in its ability o lay dormant without showing any symptoms for years. Common symptoms include fever, formation of abscess on various parts of the body such as the brain, osteomyelitis, bacteremia and various diseases of the heart, kidney and lungs such as pneumonia. Burkholderia pseudomallei is thought to have biological warfare potential and its virulence is made evident by being listed as a "Category B agent" by the US centers for Disease Control.


Burkholderia xenovorans
Description and significance
Burkholderia xenovorans formerly known as B. fungorumis is an important aerobic degrader of polychlorinatred biphenyl (PCB), which is an organic chemical that has industrial use but is toxic to animals and humans. Burkholderia xenovorans is also has one of the largest prokyraotic genome about 9.7 Mb and is the first nonpathogenic Burkholderia isolate sequenced. LB400 of Burkholderia xenovorans has varied catabolic capabilities and signifies an important group of heterotrophic bacteria in soil environments. The LB400 strain is the most studied strain due to its ability to oxidize over 20 different PCB congeners. It was isolated in a landfill contaminated by PCB in New York over 20 years ago. Burkholderia xenovorans' environmental niche is in soil rhizospheres, which is the soil area surrounding plant roots. This organism has three pathways for its degradationand it fixes Nitrogen. [1]
Cell structure and metabolism
Burkholderia xenovorans is an aerobic gram-negative bacteria that is catalase- and oxidase-positive. The most interesting feature of Burkholderia xenovorans is its ability to catabolize aromatic compounds, such as those that come out of roots or involved in root turnover. Degradation of aromatic compounds usually involves an initial ring activation through either a hydroxylation by an oxygenase or a CoA ligase-mediated pathway. The aromatic compound then is shunted to one of several different catabolic pathways, depending on the substrate. [1]
Burkholderia xenovorans contains nitrogen fixation genes, which are located on chromosome 2, which can be used to change elemental nitrogen. Burkholderia xenovorans also contains chemotaxis genes which allow it to move toward aromatic compounds in the soil rhizosphere. [1]
Ecology
Burkholderia xenovorans is found in soil rhizospheres of certain species of grass plants. [1] Burkholderia xenovorans' ability to fix nitrogen make it an important symbiont for plants to thrive in nitrogen-poor soil. The roots of these plants give Burkholderia xenovorans the necessary nutrients and protection it needs to survive, while in return Burkholderia xenovorans uses some of the energy from the nutrients it receives to fix inorganic nitrogen into organic nitrogen for plant use.
Pathology
Burkholderia xenovorans is not known to cause any disease in humans or animals, and it lacks the genetic virulence features present in Burkholderia cenocepacia, which is an opportunistic pathogen in patients with cystic fibrosis and certain granulomatous diseases. [2] Burkholderia species have experimentally been implicated in having some virulence factors (e.g. resistance to the antimicrobial Polymixin B, presence of a flagella, reactive oxygen species resistance), but those traits can also be useful in their ecological niche. [1]
Application to Biotechnology
The aerobic degradative of aromatic capabilities of Burkholderia xenovorans holds great potential for environmental biotechnological applications. Bioremediation is the use of organisms (micro- or otherwise) to break down toxic pollutants and compounds into non-toxic non-harmful compounds. [3] However, the challenge will be to manage microorganisms such as Burkholderia xenovorans and seed them into target PCB-contaminated environments and have them effectively change the contaminants into non-harmful compounds in a enviromentally cost-effective and sustainable manner. [4] Also, microbial factors must be evaluated (chemotaxis, surface adherence, etc.) to maximize interaction between pollutants and the bacteria and therefore increase the net breakdown of the pollutants into non-harmful compounds. [3] Finally, new and novel methods are needed to be able to successfully deliver the microorganisms to the target environment. [4]
Current Research
Burkholderia xenovorans has great potential to be a valuable tool in bioremediation of soil contaminated with PCBs. However, Burkholderia xenovorans has limited ability to grow on PCBs, which would require further biotreatments on the soil to maximize breakdown of PCBs to an acceptable level. In a biotreatment study Burkholderia xenovorans LB400 and Rhodococcus sp. strain RHA1 were augmented with genes for dechlorination of chlorobenzoates. The reason for this augmentation is that the PCB-catabolizing bacteria accumulate chlorobenzoates during PCB breakdown, which slows their growth. Addition of the dechlorination genes would allow the bacteria to thrive on the PCB-contaminated soil, limiting the need for further biotreatments. The results of the study were promising, showing that both augmented strains were able to grow in the PCB-contaminated test soil and had similar biodegradation rates at high- and low-inoculation levels. [5]
In a more recent study, a chimeric enzyme was created by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of biphenyl dioxygenase (BphA) genes from Burkholderia xenovorans fusing with a sequence of BphA genes from Pseudomonas sp. strain B4-Magdeburg. The goal was to make a more regiospecific enzyme that would better oxidize otherwise resistant PCBs that are poorly oxidized by the parent Burkholderia xenovorans oxidase. The resulting chimera was able significantly oxidize the experimental mixture of PCBs better than the parent enzyme, although there were a few catabolites that still resisted further oxidation. The results of the study showed that it is possible to design novel dioxygenases with greater regiospecifities against particular PCBs. [6]
Another study used a different strategy to enhance the regiospecificity of biphenyl dioxygenase (BPDO). In this study, a strategy of evolving the BPDO regiospecificity of the LB400 strain of Burkholderia xenovorans toward 2,2'-dichlorobiphenyl (2,2'-CB) by shuffling BphA genes amplified from PCB-containing soil samples. The resulting variant BPDOs did show new catalytic properties against the test PCB, but the results were mixed. There was unanticipated difficulty in linking the mutations with the desired regiospecifity, but that may have been due to the limitations of the experimental model and the complexities of changing substrate specificity of BPDOs. [7]

Campylobacter
Species
C.coli, C.concisus, C. curvus, C. faecalis, C. fetus sp., C. gracilis, C. helveticus, C. hominis, C. hyointestinalis sp., C. jejuni sp., C. jejuni-like bacterium, C. lanienae sp., C. lari, C. mucosalis, C. mucosalis-like bacterium, C. rectus, C. showae, C. sputorum sp., C. upsaliensis
Description and Significance
Campylobacter is a Gram-negative pathogen. It is gaining recognition and importance as being responsible for over three times more food poisoning cases a year than Salmonella.
Genome Structure
The genome sequencing Campylobacter jejuni was finished in 2000 by the Sanger Centre. The findings show the C. jejuni genome to have 1,641,481 base pairs, containing 1,654 protein coding genes. C. jejuni is the most gene-dense bacterium so far to be sequenced, with 94.3% of the genome containing coding genes (Sanger Institute, 2000).
Cell Structure and Metabolism
Campylobacter, a curved and motile rod, is often flagellated and causes bacterial infections in the body (FDA, 2003). Gene sets have been identified that produce sialic acid on the cell surface. This sialic acid enables Campylobacter to survive in the host's body by avoiding the body's immune response, sometimes even confusing the body into attacking itself (Sanger Institute).
Ecology
Campylobacter grows best in habitats with an oxygen level lower than 5%, and it is typically found in the intestinal tract of animals. Campylobacter colonizes the mucosal surfaces of birds and mammals, using their mobility to survive in the mucous flow (T. Wassenaar et al., 2004). Campylobacter species are sensitive to salinity, freezing, and pH below five. Campylobacter has an optimal growth temperature between 37 and 42 degrees C (Studio Chem, 2004).
Pathology
Campylobacter bacteria causes more disease a year than Shigella and Salmonella combined (FDA 2003). Campylobacteriosis and gastrointestinitis, two very common and infectious diseases, are caused by a species of Campylobacter, C. jejuni . Once infected by Campylobacter, symptoms can include bloody diarrhea, cramps, nausea, and fever. Humans usually are exposed to Campylobacter through drinking contaminated milk and water or through eating undercooked meat, specifically chicken. C. jejuni is the most commonly found species of Campylobacter, which is an pathogen that invades the lining of the small intestine, excreting gut mucosa-destroying toxins on the way. A Campylobacter infection typically can last up to seven days (MEdIC, 2004).

Campylobacter coli
Description and significance
Campylobacter coli (C. coli) is one of the many species found in class epsilonproteobacteria. It is a gram-negative S-shaped curved, somewhat rod-shaped cell, about 0.2-0.5 micrometers long, contains a single polar flagellum at one end, and usually lives in the intestinal tract of animals.[1] The bacteria colonize the intestinal epithelium to a point that it breaks out from the epithelial layer and spreads into the bloodstream.[2] C. coli is very similar to its bacteria relative, Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni); both cause inflammation of the intestine and cause diarrhea in infected animals and humans.
Most human infections, about 85% to 95%, involve C. jejuni, while C. coli is responsible for the majority of the remainder.[1] There has been many studies and research for finding treatments to this disease, one of which is the use of antimicrobial chemotherapy for patients with severe infection. Erythromycin, fluoroquinolones, and tetracycline were found to be the best antimicrobial drugs.[4] C. coli is usually isolated from pigs, birds, and surface water either by classical or molecular methods, including 16S rDNA shotgun sequencing and polymerase chain reactions to differentiate between C.coli and C.jejuni.[3]

Cell structure and metabolism
C. coli is a gram-negative, S-shaped bacteria which are characterized as being difficult to deal with, microaerophilic, and require high levels of carbon dioxide for growth. C. coli is very versatile and has a complete citric acid cycle, including a complex respiratory chain which allows both aerobic and anaerobic respiration. These characteristics allow it to live and survive in a number of environments including the intestine.
Anaerobic respiration is very important for growth in the intestinal tract and since C. coli is microaerophilic, it would have to be in an environment that contains 5-15% oxygen and 5-15% carbon dioxide. It requires a complex media to be cultured and always needs extra growth medium such as glutamate, glutamine, alpha-ketoglutarate, or formate. Because C. coli genome is relatively small, it needs many transport systems for the delivery of essential amino acids, nutrients and ions from the external environment. The major carbon sources used for growth are carbohydrates and amino acids. [6,7,8]
Ecology
C. coli is usually found hand in hand with its bacteria relative, C. jejuni. These two organisms are recognized as the two most leading causes of acute inflammation of intestine in the United States and other nations.[9] C.coli is usually isolated from pigs, birds and environmental surface water. In a total of 1,794 birds trapped, 5% of those had C. jejuni and only 0.9% were C. coli. The prevalence of C. coli differed significantly between ecological groups of birds. Birds that are feeding on invertebrates, opportunistic feeders, and birds that have a larger mass were most commonly infected. Prevalence was also higher in Europe than in Africa, the Middle East, or Asia.[10]
Pathology
C. coli is pathogenic in animals and humans. People usually get infected by eating poultry that contained the bacteria, eating raw food, drinking raw milk, and drinking bottle water that was contaminated with the bacteria. There are many virulence factors found in this bacteria, one of which is cytolethal-distending toxin (CDT), a multisubunit protein which causes cell death by blocking cell cycle checkpoints and DNA damage. The organism infects the intestinal tract of animals and humans and causes diarrhea and septicemia. The bacteria colonizes the intestinal epithelium to a point that it breaks out from the epithelial layer and spread into the bloodstream.[2] Patients with C. coli show symptoms of diarrhea, abdominal pain, fever, and bloody stool.
Application to Biotechnology
This organism does not produce any useful compounds or enzymes. Most of the studies are geared toward the problem of resistance to antimicrobial drugs.
Current Research
1. In 2005, Wondwossen A. Gebreyes, Siddhartha Thakur and W. E. Morgan Morrow of Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University did a research to determine the prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of C. coli in antimicrobial-free (ABF) production systems at farm and slaughter plant. ABF systems have been done in the poultry industry over in Europe but none in the US. With the ABF systems, pigs are not given antimicrobial during growth. If the animal is infected, they are removed from the farm. This study shows the high prevalence and antimicrobial-resistant C. coli in the ABF systems. It is the first study reporting the isolation of ciprofloxacin-antimicrobial resistant strains from ABF pigs in the USA and raises concerns.[11]
2. In 2006, a study aim to combine NASBA (nucleic acid sequence-based amplification assay) with a molecular beacon probes, which are small, single-stranded nucleic acid, hairpin probes that brightly fluoresce when they are bound to their targets for the detection of C. jejuni and C.coli based on their 16S rRNAs, and to use the method for detection of these organisms in chicken meat samples. [12]
3. In 2007, another research done to find prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Campylobacter in US dairy cattle. Feces were collect from cows and cultured for C. jejuni and C. coli. After culture, 59 strands of C. coli and 473 strands of C. jejuni were randomly selected for testing to eight antimicrobials: azithromycin, chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, clindamycin, erythromycin, gentamicin, nalidixic acid and tetracycline. C. jejuni shows resistance to only 3 of the antimicrobials, while C. coli shows resistance to almost all of the antimicrobial. This study shows the importance of Campylobacter coli its ability to increase resistance to a greater number of antimicrobials.[13]

Geobacillus kaustophilus
Genus: Geobacillus species: kaustophilus
Description and significance
This microbe was isolated from the deep-sea sediment of the Mariana Trench (2). Its optimal growth is at a temperature of 60 degrees Celsius with a temperature limit of 74 degrees Celsius (2). Bacillus is translated as "small rod," and geo is "earth" or "soil" so the genus name is roughly translated to earth or soil small rod (6). In its species name, "kausto" means "heat" while "philus" means love (2). Therefore, it is a heating-loving bacteria. Geobacillus kaustophilus grow in aquatic environments. Other species in the genus Geobacillus can also be found in petroleum reservoirs and cool soil environments (3). Species in the Geobacillus genus can live in a wide variety of environments. The microbe can withstand a pH of 2 through 12, temperatures between 5 and 78 degrees Celsius, and a salinity of 0 to 30% (5).


Application to Biotechnology
In recent studies, it was discovered that a strain of isolated bacteria from a culture of Geobacillus strain T1 was able to produce the enzyme lipase (4). This purified sample of bacteria were aerobic, Gram-positive, endospore-forming, and rod-shaped. Lipase is a vital enzyme that is used frequently in our bodies. Lipases "catalyze the hydrolysis of long chain triglyceride into diacylglyceride, monoglyceride, glycerol and free fatty acids" (4). They also aid in the reverse reaction of hydrolysis to produce esters from alcohol or fatty acids. What is unique in this finding is that the lipase is thermostable, which means that it can withstand high temperatures. This is beneficial in industries and diagnostic equipment since the enzyme will not denature under high temperature. Lipase also contributes in the flavoring of diary products and as medicine to help digest food. With its thermostable characteristic, it can create a wider range of products (4). Unfortunately, Geobacillus strain T1 will not have a major role in the production of lipase anywhere in the near future. Not only does it have a low yield of the enzyme, but the equipment required for its high temperature fermentation is also expensive (4).
Current Research
1. Detecting Antibiotic Residues: An assay is being developed with Geobacillus kaustophilus as the central element in order to detect the presence of antibiotics. In this assay, the concentration of antibiotics in food or other contaminated substances can be identified within 1.5 to 4.5 hours. What is unique about this technique of using Geobacillus kaustophilus is that it can detect concentrations of antibiotics up to the maximum level allowed in food. (7) 2. Thermoadaptation trait revealed by the genome sequence of thermophilic Geobacillus kaustophilus: The genone sequence of Geobacillus genus were compared to that of mesophiles, which are organisms that grow best in moderate temperature. After comparing the results, there were some amino acids substitutions in Geobacillus that could possibly be responsible for the thermophilic nature of Geobacillus species. This was the first time that these differences in genome structure were founded. (5) 3. Lipase from Geobacillus sp. strain T1: A pure strain of Geobacillus sp. Strain T1 bacteria was isolated from Palm Oil Mill Effluent and was discovered to be able to produce thermally-stable lipase T1. Lipase is a vital part of metabolism in organisms. It is an enzyme that hydrolyzes fat to make free fatty acids. The development of this discovery could lead to new medicines for digestive problems and a widening of flavors for dairy products. However, the study is still a work in progress since the lipase yield is low and the high temperature equipment is expensive. (4)

Sodalis glossinidius
Description and significance
Sodalis glossinidius is a Gram-negative, nonspore-forming, rod-shaped, filamentous bacteria. It has flagella expressed during immature host developmental stages, though it is non-motile(10). It is one of three endosymbionts for the tsetse fly (Glossina spp.), which are all maternally transmitted to progeny(6,7). The other two being Wigglesworthia glossinidia and a strain of Wolbachia(5). This secondary endosymbiont has a mutualistic relationship with the tsetse fly and resides inter- and intracellularly in the midgut, fat body and haemolymph of the insect(7). S. glossinidius was the first true insect endosymbiont to be isolated and cultured, achieved in 1999 by Colin Dale and Ian Maudlin at the University of Glasgow. This was performed using a mosquito (Aedes albopictus) feeder cell culture system and a sample from the haemolymph of Glossinia morsitans morsitans(7). The type strain M1T was isolated(7). S. glossinidius can be cultured intracellularly in Aedes albopictus or axenically in semidefined solid medium containing already enzimatically digested proteins as a nitrogen source. This microaerophilic bacterium grows optimally with 5% oxygen and 95% carbon dioxide at 25 degrees C. Colony morphology is uniform and off-white with defined edges.(7).
Genome structure
Sodalis glossinidius has one circular chromosome approximately 4 Mb(10). This micro-organism has a relatively inactive biochemical profile (2,432 protein coding sequences, indicating 51% reduced coding capacity) compared to other organisms in the family Enterobacteriaceae(3,7,10). This is likely due to its evolutionary path away from free-existence. The genome reduction and function loss undergone by S. glossinidius is less than other intracellular pathogens and obligate symbionts, shown by its ability to be cultured in vitro, but its genome size is still smaller than closely related free-living enterics(2). This further suggests that it is in the process of becoming more dependent on the tsetse host cell. Though most organisms of the Family Enterobacteriaceae are able to produce catalase, S. glossinidius is not; this thought to be why this micro-organism requires a microaerophilic environment(7). Genes dealing with transcription, translation, regulation, and nucleic acid and amino acid biosynthetic pathways were retained. On the other hand, 972 pseudogenes (mostly caused by single point mutations) are homologs of known proteins for defense or for transporting and metabolizing carbohydrates and inorganic ions, reflecting the mutualistic relationship with the host(2,10).
The genome of S. glossinidius has an A+T content of only 45%, whereas endosymbiont genomes are typically AT-rich. The A+T content of intracellular pathogen R. prowazekii is 71% and 75% for the mutualist Buchnera. The AT-rich genomes of intracellular pathogens and obligates may be due to the loss of function of DNA repair and recombination functions, suggesting that S. glossinidius has retained these genes(2). The 16S rRNA of S. glossinidius shares high sequence identity with other secondary endosymbionts of insects. In addition, it was found to be almost identical within the species when isolated from different Glossina spp. This suggests recent acquisition by the tsetse as an enteric and possible horizontal symbiont transfer(7).

Cell structure and metabolism
S. glossinidius is Gram-negative and rod-shaped(7). The lipopolysaccharide in this bacteria seems to be expressed without the O-antigen. This reduces the micro-organism's resistance to host immunity, another indicator of the mutualistic relationship between host and symbiont(5). Extrachromosomal DNA encodes siderophores for the acquisition of iron(4). Though S. glossinidius is non-motile, there are 90 flagellar-related coding sequences on the chromosome. A gene cluster for a complete flagellar apparatus including motility proteins (MotA and MotB) is present(10).
There are also three phylogenetically distinct type-III secretion systems (TTSSs) referred to as Sodalis symbiosis regions (SSRs) designated SSR-1, SSR-2, and SSR-3(10). When assembled on the surface of the bacterial cell, the multicomponent TTSS functions as a molecular syringe so the bacteria can inject effector proteins into the host cell and then to facilitate its own entry(3). While core components of the needle structure were conserved, regions coding for some effectors or regulators have been modified or eliminated(10). SSR-1 is similar to the pathogenicity island ysa from Yersinia enterocolitica, which is involved in entry into the host cell. SSR-2 is similar to the Salmonella pathogenicity island SPI-1 and Mxi-Spa from Shigella flexneri, which are involved in post-infection processes once the bacteria has already entered. SSR-3 is similar to SPI-2, which is found in both Salmonella spp. and Yersinia pestis, and is crucial for survival and virulence(5,10). The TTSSs and flagellar components are expressed during early larval development. They are thought to allow S. glossinidius to enter host cells and ensure the establishment and maintenance of symbiosis in intra-uterine progeny(10).
S. glossinidius has retained functional pathways for glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, the TCA cycle and the pentose phosphate pathway of free-living bacteria(10). Many energy metabolism and carbon compound assimilation genes are missing in the genome. This may indicate an adaptation to the low concentration and lack of diversity of carbohydrates available due to vertebrate blood being the only nutrient source of the tsetse host(2,5). The pathways to synthesize all amino acids except alanine are present(10). Most genes involved in energy production and conversion via anaerobic respiration have been lost. Which is expected in the constant microaerophilic environment of the tsetse midgut and haemolymph(10). In its iron-rich environment, iron transport across the cytoplasmic membrane is achieved through active transport using an ABC transporter(10). It also has an intact FeoA ferrous iron importer. Furthermore, plasmid pSG1 has a system of siderophores to transport and store iron(4).
The principle carbon source during growth is N-acetyl-d-glucosamine (GlcNAc), which it produces from the breakdown of chitin(6). Chitin (polymerized N-acetyl-d-glucosamine) is present in the exoskeleton and gut peritrophic membrane of the tsetse fly and S. glossinidius catabolizes it by producing the chitinase, b-N-acetylglucosaminidase(7).
Ecology
S. glossinidius is an endosymbiont of the tsetse fly with a mutualistic relationship(T. b. gambiense)(7). Symbionts to blood-feeding insects are thought to supplement the restricted diet or blood by providing cofactors and vitamin metabolites. Genes for biotin and lipoic acid, molybdenum cofactor, thiamine, riboflavin, and folic acid were present in the micro-organism's genome(2). S. glossinidius is known to increase trypanosome infection rate for tsetse(6). (See Pathology for more details)

Pathology
Sodalis glossinidius is a mutualist micro-organism to tsetse and its chromosomally encoded TTSSs, hemolysin, lipases, and adhesions are thought to fulfill functions different from those reported in pathogenic microbes(10). Despite this mutualistic relationship, it has been shown that S. glossinidius does increase susceptibility to trypanosome infection for the tsetse host by hindering the tsetse immune system(6). When tsetse were treated with streptozotocin (2-deoxy-2-(3-methyl-3-nitrosoureido)--glucopyranoside), a bacteriocidal analogue of GlcNAc (primary carbon source of S. glossinidius), the fecundity and pupal emergence rates were largely unaffected(6). This antibiotic does not affect the other symbionts of T. b. gambiense. GlcNAc is an effective inhibitor of tsetse midgut lectin, which has a role in non-self recognition and combatting tsetse fly infection(11). These lectin inhibitory sugars accumulate in tsetse puparia through the enzymatic activity of chitinases secreted by S. glossinigius, thus promoting increased trypanosome infection rates in tsetse(6,10).
Application to Biotechnology
S. glossinidius has lost much of its biochemical profile(7). Genetic material for compounds and enzymes have drifted into pseudogene status due to its specialized environment, the tsetse fly(3.) There are no known biotechnological benefits to society.
Current Research
Some of the recent research on Sodalis glossinidius:
(12) Though bacterial symbionts rarely contain bacteriophages due to their lack of contact outside the host. Sodalis glossinidius contains an extrachomosomal element pSOG3 with phage-related sequences. A culture from Glossina morsitans morsitans was isolated and pSOG3 was shotgun sequenced. It was found to be 52 kb with 50 putative CDSs and five pseudogenes. This extrachromosomal element is thought to have formed from the integration of two distinct ancestral phage genomes. This heterodimeric element was derived from extant phages HK620 (a relative of P22) and epsilon15. Degeneration occured when S. glossinidius moved toward symbiosis with tsetse. pSOG3 is thought to replicate extrachromosomally. There are two sequences hypothesized to be involved in replication. The putative protein product of an ORF is similar to RepA in Erwinia amylovora. Another ORF is similar to the plasmid partitioning protein, ParA, of Corynebacterium glutamicum. Phage virions have been identified sporadically in S. glossinidius and it is hypothesized that pSOG3 is the prophage responsible for those virions.

Sphaerotilus
Description and Significance
Sphaerotilus natans is a filamentous bacterium that is covered in a tubular sheath and can be found in flowing water and in sewage and wastewater treatment plants. While this bacterium sometimes clogs pipes and causes other similar problems, it does not cause major threat to wastewater treatment plants nor is it known to be pathogentic.
Genome Structure
No Sphaerotilus genomes have been sequenced at this time.

Ecology
Sphaerotilus natans can be mainly found in flowing water, sewage, and activated sludge. It has been known to cause such problems as pipe clogging and "bulking of activated sludge in wastewater treatment" due to its ability to settle on a solid surface by entanglement or by using an adhesive basal element on one end of the filament (Pellegrin et al. 1999). In addition, strains of filamentous bacteria were isolated from paper mill slimes that had morphological and physiological characteristics of Sphaerotilus. However, these isolates could grow at tempuratures up to 40
Sheath-Degrading Microorganisms
Microorganisms have been collected from the soil and river water that are able to degrade and grow on the purified sheath of Sphaerotilus natans. Two bacterial strains, called TB and TK, are rod shaped, negatively stained by gram staining, faculatitvely anaerobic, and formed ellipsoidal endospores: these defining characteristics suggested that the bacteria belong to the genus Paenibacillus according to some researchers. 

Spirillum
Description and Significance
Spirillum bacteria are thought to have been first described by van Leeuwenhoek in the 1670s and later by Muller. S. volutans is a large bacterium as well as an obligate microaerophile with a helical structure.

Ecology
S. volutans has been found in the water of a cooling tower of a sugar-beet refinery in England and from water of a polluted pond. It is thought that the bacterium can be found in many bodies of stagnant water.

Spirochaeta americana
Description and Significance
S. americana is an extremophile. It has been found in the highly alkaline anaerobic environment of Mono Lake, California. S. Americana can also inhabit areas with high sulfur and salt concentrations. S. americana has scientists especially excited. Some believe that the harsh environment of Mono Lake is similar to that of Mars, giving hope to the theory that life existed there. S. americana is an obligate anaerobe and has an optimal pH range of 8.0 - 10.5. Cells of the Gram-negative strain were motile and spirochaete-shaped with sizes of 0.2-0.22 x 8-18 microm.


"Most cot genes, and the gerE gene, are transcribed by sigmaK RNA polymerase.
Previously, it was shown that the GerE protein inhibits transcription in vitro of the sigK gene encoding sigmaK.
Cell specificity is first established in the forespore under the control of the sigma F factor, which is itself activated through the action of the SpoIIE serine phosphatase, an enzyme targeted to the septum between the two cells.
Although spo0H is transcriptionally regulated by the key regulatory device that controls sporulation initiation, the Spo0 phosphorelay, there is considerable evidence implicating a mechanism of post-translational control that governs the activity and concentration of sigmaH.
We demonstrated that katX is also a sigmaB-dependent general stress gene, since it is strongly induced by heat, salt and ethanol stress, as well as by energy depletion.
Expression of the sigma(K)-dependent cwlH gene depended on gerE.
The expression of rsfA is under the control of both sigma(F) and sigma(G).
Furthermore, YtxH and YvyD seemed to be induced after phosphate starvation in the wild type in a sigma(B)-dependent manner and in the sigB mutant probably via sigma(H).
spo0H RNA and sigma H levels during growth are not identical to each other or to the pattern of expression of spoVG, a gene transcribed by E sigma H.
The complete nucleotide sequence of a 5 kb fragment including the entire rpoD gene revealed the presence of two other genes preceding rpoD in the order P23-dnaE-rpoD.
We have now determined the 1809-base pair sequence of the dnaE coding region, which precedes rpoD and is transcribed in the same counterclockwise direction on the chromosome.
As part of the Bacillus subtilis genome sequencing project, we have determined the complete nucleotide sequence of a skin element which is located between spoIVCB and spoIIIC.
This stress-induced increase in ykzA expression is absolutely dependent on the alternative sigma factor sigmaB, which controls a large stationary-phase and stress regulon.
In contrast, sspJ is transcribed in the forespore compartment by RNA polymerase with the forespore-specific sigmaG and appears to give a monocistronic transcript.
Finally, we show that proper localization of SpoIVA required the expression of one or more genes which, like spoIVA, are under the control of the mother cell transcription factor sigmaE.
A low level of GerE activated transcription of cotD by sigmaK RNA polymerase in vitro, but a higher level of GerE repressed cotD transcription.
We show that GerE binds to two sites that span the -35 region of the cotD promoter.
The expression of the bkd operon was induced by the presence of isoleucine or valine in the growth medium and depended upon the presence of the sigma factor SigL, a member of the sigma 54 family.
The ydaP gene might belong to the increasing number of sigmaB-dependent genes whose orthologues are under the control of sigmas in Escherichia coli, indicating that both regulons may fulfil similar functions.
(i) The finding that the bmrUR operon is under sigmaB control indicates that the elimination of multidrug compounds might be a new function in multiple stress resistance.
The SpoIIE phosphatase indirectly activates sigmaF by dephosphorylating a protein (SpoIIAA-P) in the pathway that controls the activity of the transcription factor.
The first stage, which involves the phosphatase function of SpoIIE, depends on the cell division protein FtsZ and could correspond to the FtsZ-dependent assembly of SpoIIE into E-rings.
The yfhP, yfhQ (mutY homologue), yfhS and yfhR (oxidoreductase homologue) genes, which are located upstream of the sspE locus, have been identified in the Bacillus subtilis genome.
Taken together, the results support the idea that sequestration of SpoIIE protein into the prespore plays an important role in the control of sigmaF activation and in coupling this activation to septation.
In the shaA mutant, sigma(H)-dependent expression of spo0A and spoVG at an early stage of sporulation was sensitive to external NaCl.
Secondly, SpoIIE is essential for the activation of the first compartment-specific transcription factor sigma(F) in the prespore.
Transcription of the cotB, cotC, and cotX genes by final sigma(K) RNA polymerase is activated by a small, DNA-binding protein called GerE.
In vitro transcription experiments suggest that the differential pattern of cot gene expression results from the combined action of GerE and another transcription factor, SpoIIID.
The addition of ClpX to in vitro transcription reactions resulted in the stimulation of RNAP holoenzyme activity, but sigmaH-RNAP was observed to be more sensitive to ClpX-dependent stimulation than sigmaA-RNAP.
ykuD was transcribed by SigK RNA polymerase from T4 of sporulation.
The spoIIG promoter is used by RNA polymerase containing sigma A (E sigma A), the primary form of RNA polymerase found in vegetative cells in Bacillus subtilis.
Sin, another DNA-binding protein, represses the same genes, spoIIA, spoIIE and spoIIG, that are activated by Spo0A.
We also show that spoIVB transcription is partially dependent on the action of the mother cell regulatory gene spoIIID, a finding that suggests that the transcription of certain forespore-expressed genes is influenced by events in the mother cell.
We found that sigma H-RNA polymerase transcribes spoIIA accurately in vitro and propose that sigma H directs transcription of spoIIA during sporulation.
A 27-kilodalton RNA polymerase sigma factor called sigma K (or sigma 27) has been found that causes weak transcription of spoIVCB and strong transcription of cotD.
A 14-kD protein was also discovered that changes the specificity of sigma K-containing RNA polymerase, greatly stimulating spoIVCB transcription and markedly repressing cotD transcription.
The product of regulatory gene spo0H is an RNA polymerase sigma factor called sigma H, which directs transcription of a sporulation gene known as spoVG.
These results support a model in which a form of RNA polymerase containing sigma A is utilized in an unusual manner to activate the transcription of the spoIIG operon well after the onset of endospore formation.
The rpoD locus lay between aroD and lys, tightly linked to dnaE and inseparable from crsA.
Both dnaE and rpoD were transcribed in the same direction, counterclockwise on the chromosome.
One sigma factor, which appears 2 h after the initiation of sporulation, is sigma E (formerly sigma 29).
The activity of sigma F is governed by SpoIIAA, SpoIIAB, and SpoIIE, a membrane protein localized at the polar septum.
Activation of pro-sigma K processing in the mother cell at late stages of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis requires the presence of active sigma G in the forespore.
Analysis of RNA isolated from a sigma B deletion mutant revealed that the transcription of gspA is sigma B dependent.
SpoIIID is a sequence-specific, DNA-binding protein that activates or represses transcription of different genes by sigma K RNA polymerase in vitro.
The sigma B structural gene, sigB, lies in an operon with three other genes whose products have been shown to control sigma B activity in response to environmental stress.
The predicted CheV gene product contains an amino-terminal CheW homologous domain linked to a response regulator domain of the CheY family, suggesting that either or both of these functions are duplicated.
These results indicate that spoVE expression in sporulating cells is controlled essentially by sigma E-associated RNA polymerase.
Two strong SpoIIID-binding sites were mapped in the spoVD promoter region, one overlapping the -35 region and the other encompassing the -10 region and the transcriptional start site.
Two promoters are involved in transcriptional initiation, the sigma A-dependent upstream promoter contributes to the basal level during growth, whereas the sigma B-dependent downstream promoter is induced after different stress conditions.
Among them are two sigma factors, sigmaE and sigmaK, and a DNA-binding protein, SpoIIID.
sigma X also contributes to the expression of CsbB, a putative membrane-bound glucosyl transferase that is partially controlled by the sigma B stress response sigma factor.
The results indicate that PhoP~P is sufficient to repress the transcription of the tagA and tagD promoters and also to activate the transcription of the tuaA promoter.
The developmental programme of these two cells involves the compartmentalized activities of sigmaE in the larger mother cell and of sigmaF in the smaller prespore.
In that respect sigB is similar to the previously described gene gsiB which is also a member of the sigmaB regulon.
The sigmaB-dependent promoter drives expression of yvyD under stress conditions and after glucose starvation, whereas a sigmaH-dependent promoter is responsible for yvyD transcription following amino acid limitation.
The class includes AsiA form bacteriophage T4, which inhibits Escherichia coli sigma 70; FlgM, present in both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, which inhibits the flagella sigma factor sigma 28; SpoIIAB, which inhibits the sporulation-specific sigma factor, sigma F and sigma G, of Bacillus subtilis; RbsW of B. subtilis, which inhibits stress response sigma factor sigma B; and DnaK, a general regulator of the heat shock response, which in bacteria inhibits the heat shock sigma factor sigma 32.
These results suggest that a rising level of GerE in sporulating cells may first activate cotD transcription from the upstream site then repress transcription as the downstream site becomes occupied.
"Most cot genes, and the gerE gene, are transcribed by sigmaK RNA polymerase.
Previously, it was shown that the GerE protein inhibits transcription in vitro of the sigK gene encoding sigmaK.
Here, we show that GerE binds near the sigK transcriptional start site, to act as a repressor.
These results demonstrate that sigmaK-dependent transcription of gerE initiates a negative feedback loop in which GerE acts as a repressor to limit production of sigmaK.
At its peak, the concentration of sigmaF was some twofold higher than that of sigmaA.
Cell specificity is first established in the forespore under the control of the sigma F factor, which is itself activated through the action of the SpoIIE serine phosphatase, an enzyme targeted to the septum between the two cells.
YhdN shows weak similarities to potassium ion channel proteins and YocK shows resemblance to the DnaK suppressor protein DksA.
Three new sigmaB-dependent genes (ydaE, ydaG and yfkM) encoding proteins with still unknown functions were also described.
Dephosphorylation of SpoIIAA-P by SpoIIE is strictly dependent on the presence of the bivalent metal ions Mn2+ or Mg2+.
Cell-specific activation of transcription factor sigmaF during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis requires the formation of the polar septum and the activity of a serine phosphatase (SpoIIE) located in the septum.
Evidence based on the use of modified and mutant forms of the phosphatase protein indicates that SpoIIE blocks the capacity of unphosphorylated SpoIIAA to activate sigmaF until formation of the polar septum is completed.
The sspH and sspL genes are recognized primarily by the forespore-specific sigma factor for RNA polymerase, sigmaG; the sspN-tlp operon is recognized equally well by sigmaG and the other forespore-specific sigma factor, sigmaF.
In the mother cell compartment of sporulating cells, expression of the sigE gene, encoding the earlier-acting sigma factor, sigmaE, is negatively regulated by the later-acting sigma factor, sigmaK.
Production of sigmaK about 1 h earlier than normal does affect Spo0A, which when phosphorylated is an activator of sigE transcription.
The ald promoter, like the sigE promoter, is believed to be recognized by sigmaA RNA polymerase, suggesting that sigmaK may inhibit sigmaA activity late in sporulation.
During endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis, the DNA binding protein GerE stimulates transcription from several promoters that are used by RNA polymerase containing sigmaK
GerE binds to a site on one of these promoters, cotX, that overlaps its -35 region.
Although spo0H is transcriptionally regulated by the key regulatory device that controls sporulation initiation, the Spo0 phosphorelay, there is considerable evidence implicating a mechanism of post-translational control that governs the activity and concentration of sigmaH.
Northern blot and primer extension analyses indicated that yfhS is transcribed by E sigma E during sporulation.
These results suggest that YfhP may act as a negative regulator for the transcription of yfhQ, yfhR, sspE and yfhP.
In addition to controlling transcription of phrC, sigmaH appears to control expression of at least one other gene required for production of CSF.
The rocG gene of Bacillus subtilis, encoding a catabolic glutamate dehydrogenase, is transcribed by SigL-containing RNA polymerase and requires for its expression RocR, a member of the NtrC/NifA family of proteins that bind to enhancer-like elements, called upstream activating sequences (UAS).
Unlike the case for other sigma(54)-dependent genes, rocG has no UAS; instead, its expression depends on a sequence located 1.5 kilobases downstream of the rocG promoter, beyond the end of the rocG coding region.
sigmaF is controlled by a regulatory cascade involving an anti-sigma factor, SpoIIAB, an anti-anti-sigma factor, SpoIIAA, and a membrane-bound phosphatase, SpoIIE, which converts the inactive, phosphorylated form of SpoIIAA back to the active form.
The genes were designated tap1, flgD, flgE, orf4, motA, motB, fliL, fliM, fliY, orf10 and fliP.
We demonstrated that katX is also a sigmaB-dependent general stress gene, since it is strongly induced by heat, salt and ethanol stress, as well as by energy depletion.
The -10 and -35 sequences of the sigmaB- and sigmaF-dependent promoters of katX overlap, and the transcriptional start points used by EsigmaB and EsigmaF differ by only one nucleotide.
Our results indicate that the level of KatX level in outgrowing spores depends mainly on EsigmaF, because sigB mutants show normal KatX activity in dormant and outgrowing spores.
Therefore, the physiological role of sigmaB-dependent katX expression remains obscure.
The results indicate an overlap between the sigmaB regulon and the sigmaF regulon, and the physiological implications of this overlap are discussed.
Expression of the sigma(K)-dependent cwlH gene depended on gerE.
The expression of rsfA is under the control of both sigma(F) and sigma(G).
Localization of SpoIIE was shown to be dependent on the essential cell division protein FtsZ.
In addition to others, it represses abrB and activates spoIIA and spoIIE transcription.
Analysis of the expression of a translational ywhE-lacZ fusion showed that ywhE expression is sporulation-specific, and is controlled predominantly by the forespore-specific sigma factor sigma(F), and to a lesser extent by sigma(G).
DNase I footprinting showed that SpoIIID binds strongly to two sites in the cotC promoter region, binds weakly to one site in the cotX promoter, and does not bind specifically to cotB.
A low concentration of GerE activated cotB transcription by final sigma(K) RNA polymerase, whereas a higher concentration was needed to activate transcription of cotX or cotC.
SpoIIID at low concentration repressed cotC transcription, whereas a higher concentration only partially repressed cotX transcription and had little effect on cotB transcription.
However, the mutant was unable to stimulate transcription by final sigma(A)-RNA polymerase from the Spo0A-dependent spoIIG operon promoter.
Phylogenetic analyses of various sigma factor sequences from endospore-forming bacteria revealed that homologues of sigma(E), sigma(K) and sigma(G) clustered together regardless of genus, suggesting a common origin of sporulation sigma factors.
Furthermore, YtxH and YvyD seemed to be induced after phosphate starvation in the wild type in a sigma(B)-dependent manner and in the sigB mutant probably via sigma(H).
Transcription of ydhD was dependent on SigE, and the mRNA was detectable from 2 h after the cessation of logarithmic growth (T2 of sporulation).
Both SigK and GerE were essential for ykvP expression, and this gene was transcribed from T5 of sporulation.
Therefore, ftsY is solely expressed during sporulation from a sigma(K)- and GerE-controlled promoter that is located immediately upstream of ftsY inside the smc gene.
In this mutant, expression of the spoIIG gene, whose transcription depends on both sigma(A) and the phosphorylated Spo0A protein, Spo0A~P, a major transcription factor during early stages of sporulation, was greatly reduced at 43 degrees C.
In vivo studies of the activity of four of the kinases, KinA, KinC, KinD (ykvD) and KinE (ykrQ), using abrB transcription as an indicator of Spo0A~P level, revealed that KinC and KinD were responsible for Spo0A~P production during the exponential phase of growth in the absence of KinA and KinB.
We now report that the purified product of gerE (GerE) is a DNA-binding protein that adheres to the promoters for cotB and cotC.
We directly tested this hypothesis by performing in vitro transcription assays with reconstituted E sigma H and a set of plasmids containing the kinA, spo0F, and spo0A promoter regions.
sigma F activity in the forespore regulates the proteolytic processing of sigma E within the mother cell compartment.
This timing of expression and medium dependence were very similar to those for ctc, the only other recognized gene dependent on sigma B.
Two RNA polymerase sigma factors, sigma F and sigma E, are produced during the first two hours of endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis.
These studies indicate that spo0H is transcribed by the major vegetative RNA polymerase, E sigma A.
spo0H RNA and sigma H levels during growth are not identical to each other or to the pattern of expression of spoVG, a gene transcribed by E sigma H.
The sspB and sspE genes code for major small, acid-soluble proteins of Bacillus subtilis spores and are transcribed during sporulation by RNA polymerase containing sigma G.
These data suggest that synthesis of sigma G is dependent neither on transcription from the spoIIG promoter nor on sigma G itself but can be due to another transcription factor.
These results indicate that gerD is another member of the sigma G regulon, which includes a number of genes expressed only in the forespore compartment of sporulating cells of B. subtilis.
There is also substantial homology between the deduced products of tagB in the tagABC operon and tagF in the tagDEF operon.
However, the observations that sigma F directs transcription of the structural gene for sigma G and that sigma F activity can be modified by the product of a gene, spoIIAB, has led us to investigate the role of spoIIAB during sporulation.
These observations confirm that spoIIAB is essential for sporulation and are consistent with models in which the product of spoIIAB plays a role in regulating the timing and/or compartment specificity of sigma F- and sigma G-directed transcription.
One such factor, sigma D (sigma 28), is expressed during vegetative growth and has been implicated in the transcription of a regulon of genes expressed during exponential growth and the early stationary phase.
The structural gene (sigK) for the mother-cell RNA polymerase sigma-factor sigma K in Bacillus subtilis is a composite of two truncated genes, named spoIVCB and spoIIIC, which are brought together by site-specific recombination during sporulation.
Transcription of these genes is mediated by RNA polymerase containing sigma G (E sigma G), the product of the sigG gene, which is itself expressed at stage III in the developing forespore.
In vitro studies demonstrated that the Bacillus subtilis subtilisin gene (aprE) could be transcribed by RNA polymerase holoenzyme reconstituted from core and sigma A factor obtained from vegetative cells.
S1 nuclease mapping experiments showed that the sdh operon is transcribed from a sigma-43 promoter; the transcript starts at a guanosine residue 90 base pairs upstream from the first gene of the operon, sdhC.
The complete nucleotide sequence of a 5 kb fragment including the entire rpoD gene revealed the presence of two other genes preceding rpoD in the order P23-dnaE-rpoD.
In the present report we describe a promoter that is adjacent to the rrnB region of the B. subtilis chromosome and is utilized in vitro and in vivo by E sigma 29.
One branch leads to expression of spoVA within the spore compartment, the other to expression of spoIIIC in the mother cell.
Transcription of amyE initiates in vitro from a promoter recognized by the major vegetative form of RNA polymerase, E sigma 43.
Three promoters direct transcription of the sigA (rpoD) operon in Bacillus subtilis.
Nuclease S1 mapping was used to identify the transcription start points of the spoIIA and spoVA operons of Bacillus subtilis.
We have now determined the 1809-base pair sequence of the dnaE coding region, which precedes rpoD and is transcribed in the same counterclockwise direction on the chromosome.
Here we report that several base substitutions in the ctc promoter differentially affect the utilization of the promoter by E sigma 37 or E sigma 29.
The promoter (amyP) of the Bacillus subtilis alpha-amylase gene, which is recognized by E sigma A, has a three out of six match to the consensus promoter in both the -35 and -10 hexamers.
Two such amino acid substitutions were isolated in sigma A and one was isolated in sigma H.
Three genes called rocD, rocE and rocF were found near the rocR gene in B. subtilis.
SpoIIAB is also a serine kinase that inactivates SpoIIAA.
The promoter of this operon is recognized by RNA polymerase containing the sigma 54-like factor sigma L.
Finally, we present evidence that SinR controls sporulation through several independent genes, i.e., sp0A, spoIIA, and possibly spoIIG and spoIIE.
Such promoters depend on sigma factors (sigma D and sigma F, respectively) particularly similar to the deduced whiG gene product.
As part of the Bacillus subtilis genome sequencing project, we have determined the complete nucleotide sequence of a skin element which is located between spoIVCB and spoIIIC.
The hydropathy profiles of the dltB and dltD gene products suggest a transmembrane location for the former and an amino-terminal signal peptide for the latter.
Like the promoter for cotB, the cotG promoter is induced at a late stage of sporulation under the control of the RNA polymerase sigma factor sigma K and the DNA-binding protein GerE.
Activation of sigma E depends on sigma F, the factor that governs transcription in the forespore.
We have identified and characterized a sigma F-dependent gene, csfX, encoding a protein necessary and sufficient for triggering processing of pro-sigma E.
Mother-cell-specific gene expression during sporulation of Bacillus subtilis is controlled by sigma E and sigma K RNA polymerases.
Primer extension analysis suggested that the cwlB operon is transcribed by E sigma D and E sigma A, the former transcripts being predominants at the exponential growth phase.
Transcription of cheV initiates from a sigma D-dependent promoter element both in vivo and in vitro, and expression of a cheV-lacZ fusion is completely dependent on sigD.
In vivo expression of the spoIIG promoter is activated shortly after the onset of sporulation and is dependent on kinA, spo0F, spo0B and spo0A genes.
spoVD transcription appears to occur from a promoter recognized by the sigma E form of RNA polymerase.
Reconstitution analysis of sigma E purified from the sporulating cell extracts and vegetative core RNA polymerase showed that sigma E recognizes the P2 promoter.
RsbW efficiently blocked sigma B-dependent transcription but only if it was incubated with sigma B prior to the addition of the core enzyme.
We conclude that spoIIM is a member of the sigma E regulon and that it may be transcribed exclusively by E sigma E.
Activation of sigma E requires expression of the sigma F-directed gene spoIIR.
The gbsA and gbsB genes are transcribed in the same direction, are separated by a short intergenic region, and are likely to form an operon.
In some conditions, this gene can be transcribed by RNA polymerase associated with either sigma F or sigma G, in contrast to previous studies implying exclusive control by sigma G.
We have shown previously that the transcription of degR is driven by an alternative sigma factor, sigmaD.
From these results we conclude that ComK negatively regulates degR expression by preventing sigmaD-driven transcription of degR, possibly through interaction with the control region.
We overproduced and purified sigma(X) from Escherichia coli and demonstrate that in vitro, both sigma(A) and sigma(X) holoenzymes recognize promoter elements within the sigX-ypuN control region.
Transcriptional studies showed that nadE is strongly induced in response to heat, ethanol and salt stress or after starvation for glucose in a sigma B-dependent manner.
Bacillus subtilis Spo0A activates transcription from both sigmaA- and sigmaH-dependent promoters.
Transcriptional studies demonstrated that the expression from the araE promoter is induced by L-arabinose, repressed by glucose, and negatively regulated by AraR.
DNA sequences upstream of P1 were similar to consensus SigK-dependent promoters, while P2 and P3 were similar to consensus SigE-dependent promoters.
The start point of transcription is preceded by potential promoter sequences for sigmaA, sigmaB and sigmaD.
These data indicate that katX is an additional member of the forespore-specific sigmaF regulon.
One class of Spo0A-activated promoter, which includes spoIIEp, is recognized by RNA polymerase associated with the primary sigma factor, sigma A (sigmaA); the second, which includes spoIIAp, is recognized by RNA polymerase associated with an early-sporulation sigma factor, sigma H (sigmaH).
A sigmaW-dependent promoter (PW) precedes sigW, demonstrating that this transcription factor is positively autoregulated.
This stress-induced increase in ykzA expression is absolutely dependent on the alternative sigma factor sigmaB, which controls a large stationary-phase and stress regulon.
ykzA is therefore another example of a gene common to the RpoS and sigmaB stress regulons of E. coli and B. subtilis, respectively.
ComK negatively controls the transcription of hag by stimulating the transcription of comF-flgM, thereby increasing the production of the FlgM antisigma factor that inhibits sigmaD activity.
Both Spo0A~P and Spo0ABD stimulated transcription from the spoIIG promoter 10-fold more efficiently than Spo0A.
Primer extension experiments and Northern blot analysis show that an active sigmaA-dependent promoter precedes kdgR and transcription is terminated at the putative p-independent terminator downstream of kdgT.
This indicates that the yvyD gene product, being a member of both the sigmaB and sigmaH regulons, might negatively regulate the activity of the sigmaL regulon.
In addition to the typical sigmaB-dependent, stress- and starvation-inducible pattern, yvyD is also induced in response to amino acid depletion.
The Bacillus subtilis clpC operon is regulated by two stress induction pathways relying on either sigmaB or a class III stress induction mechanism acting at a sigmaA-like promoter.
Our data demonstrate that the CtsR protein acts as a global repressor of the clpC operon, as well as other class III heat shock genes, by preventing unstressed transcription from either the sigmaB- or sigmaA-dependent promoter and might be inactivated or dissociate under inducing stress conditions.
sspG transcription also requires the DNA binding protein GerE.
In contrast, sspJ is transcribed in the forespore compartment by RNA polymerase with the forespore-specific sigmaG and appears to give a monocistronic transcript.
Finally, we show that proper localization of SpoIVA required the expression of one or more genes which, like spoIVA, are under the control of the mother cell transcription factor sigmaE.
The sigma W regulon includes a penicillin binding protein (PBP4*) and a co-transcribed amino acid racemase (RacX), homologues of signal peptide peptidase (YteI), flotillin (YuaG), ABC transporters (YknXYZ), non-haem bromoperoxidase (YdjP), epoxide hydrolase (YfhM) and three small peptides with structural similarities to bacteriocin precursor polypeptides.
These results suggest that a rising level of GerE in sporulating cells may first activate cotD transcription from the upstream site then repress transcription as the downstream site becomes occupied.
Here, we show that GerE binds near the sigK transcriptional start site, to act as a repressor.
These results demonstrate that sigmaK-dependent transcription of gerE initiates a negative feedback loop in which GerE acts as a repressor to limit production of sigmaK.
At its peak, the concentration of sigmaF was some twofold higher than that of sigmaA.
YhdN shows weak similarities to potassium ion channel proteins and YocK shows resemblance to the DnaK suppressor protein DksA.
Three new sigmaB-dependent genes (ydaE, ydaG and yfkM) encoding proteins with still unknown functions were also described.
Dephosphorylation of SpoIIAA-P by SpoIIE is strictly dependent on the presence of the bivalent metal ions Mn2+ or Mg2+.
Cell-specific activation of transcription factor sigmaF during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis requires the formation of the polar septum and the activity of a serine phosphatase (SpoIIE) located in the septum.
Evidence based on the use of modified and mutant forms of the phosphatase protein indicates that SpoIIE blocks the capacity of unphosphorylated SpoIIAA to activate sigmaF until formation of the polar septum is completed.
The sspH and sspL genes are recognized primarily by the forespore-specific sigma factor for RNA polymerase, sigmaG; the sspN-tlp operon is recognized equally well by sigmaG and the other forespore-specific sigma factor, sigmaF.
In the mother cell compartment of sporulating cells, expression of the sigE gene, encoding the earlier-acting sigma factor, sigmaE, is negatively regulated by the later-acting sigma factor, sigmaK.
Production of sigmaK about 1 h earlier than normal does affect Spo0A, which when phosphorylated is an activator of sigE transcription.
The ald promoter, like the sigE promoter, is believed to be recognized by sigmaA RNA polymerase, suggesting that sigmaK may inhibit sigmaA activity late in sporulation.
During endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis, the DNA binding protein GerE stimulates transcription from several promoters that are used by RNA polymerase containing sigmaK
GerE binds to a site on one of these promoters, cotX, that overlaps its -35 region.
Northern blot and primer extension analyses indicated that yfhS is transcribed by E sigma E during sporulation.
These results suggest that YfhP may act as a negative regulator for the transcription of yfhQ, yfhR, sspE and yfhP.
In addition to controlling transcription of phrC, sigmaH appears to control expression of at least one other gene required for production of CSF.
The rocG gene of Bacillus subtilis, encoding a catabolic glutamate dehydrogenase, is transcribed by SigL-containing RNA polymerase and requires for its expression RocR, a member of the NtrC/NifA family of proteins that bind to enhancer-like elements, called upstream activating sequences (UAS).
Unlike the case for other sigma(54)-dependent genes, rocG has no UAS; instead, its expression depends on a sequence located 1.5 kilobases downstream of the rocG promoter, beyond the end of the rocG coding region.
sigmaF is controlled by a regulatory cascade involving an anti-sigma factor, SpoIIAB, an anti-anti-sigma factor, SpoIIAA, and a membrane-bound phosphatase, SpoIIE, which converts the inactive, phosphorylated form of SpoIIAA back to the active form.
The genes were designated tap1, flgD, flgE, orf4, motA, motB, fliL, fliM, fliY, orf10 and fliP.
The -10 and -35 sequences of the sigmaB- and sigmaF-dependent promoters of katX overlap, and the transcriptional start points used by EsigmaB and EsigmaF differ by only one nucleotide.
Our results indicate that the level of KatX level in outgrowing spores depends mainly on EsigmaF, because sigB mutants show normal KatX activity in dormant and outgrowing spores.
Therefore, the physiological role of sigmaB-dependent katX expression remains obscure.
The results indicate an overlap between the sigmaB regulon and the sigmaF regulon, and the physiological implications of this overlap are discussed.
Localization of SpoIIE was shown to be dependent on the essential cell division protein FtsZ.
In addition to others, it represses abrB and activates spoIIA and spoIIE transcription.
Analysis of the expression of a translational ywhE-lacZ fusion showed that ywhE expression is sporulation-specific, and is controlled predominantly by the forespore-specific sigma factor sigma(F), and to a lesser extent by sigma(G).
DNase I footprinting showed that SpoIIID binds strongly to two sites in the cotC promoter region, binds weakly to one site in the cotX promoter, and does not bind specifically to cotB.
A low concentration of GerE activated cotB transcription by final sigma(K) RNA polymerase, whereas a higher concentration was needed to activate transcription of cotX or cotC.
SpoIIID at low concentration repressed cotC transcription, whereas a higher concentration only partially repressed cotX transcription and had little effect on cotB transcription.
However, the mutant was unable to stimulate transcription by final sigma(A)-RNA polymerase from the Spo0A-dependent spoIIG operon promoter.
Phylogenetic analyses of various sigma factor sequences from endospore-forming bacteria revealed that homologues of sigma(E), sigma(K) and sigma(G) clustered together regardless of genus, suggesting a common origin of sporulation sigma factors.
Transcription of ydhD was dependent on SigE, and the mRNA was detectable from 2 h after the cessation of logarithmic growth (T2 of sporulation).
Both SigK and GerE were essential for ykvP expression, and this gene was transcribed from T5 of sporulation.
Therefore, ftsY is solely expressed during sporulation from a sigma(K)- and GerE-controlled promoter that is located immediately upstream of ftsY inside the smc gene.
In this mutant, expression of the spoIIG gene, whose transcription depends on both sigma(A) and the phosphorylated Spo0A protein, Spo0A~P, a major transcription factor during early stages of sporulation, was greatly reduced at 43 degrees C.
In vivo studies of the activity of four of the kinases, KinA, KinC, KinD (ykvD) and KinE (ykrQ), using abrB transcription as an indicator of Spo0A~P level, revealed that KinC and KinD were responsible for Spo0A~P production during the exponential phase of growth in the absence of KinA and KinB.
We now report that the purified product of gerE (GerE) is a DNA-binding protein that adheres to the promoters for cotB and cotC.
We directly tested this hypothesis by performing in vitro transcription assays with reconstituted E sigma H and a set of plasmids containing the kinA, spo0F, and spo0A promoter regions.
sigma F activity in the forespore regulates the proteolytic processing of sigma E within the mother cell compartment.
This timing of expression and medium dependence were very similar to those for ctc, the only other recognized gene dependent on sigma B.
Two RNA polymerase sigma factors, sigma F and sigma E, are produced during the first two hours of endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis.
These studies indicate that spo0H is transcribed by the major vegetative RNA polymerase, E sigma A.
The sspB and sspE genes code for major small, acid-soluble proteins of Bacillus subtilis spores and are transcribed during sporulation by RNA polymerase containing sigma G.
These data suggest that synthesis of sigma G is dependent neither on transcription from the spoIIG promoter nor on sigma G itself but can be due to another transcription factor.
These results indicate that gerD is another member of the sigma G regulon, which includes a number of genes expressed only in the forespore compartment of sporulating cells of B. subtilis.
There is also substantial homology between the deduced products of tagB in the tagABC operon and tagF in the tagDEF operon.
However, the observations that sigma F directs transcription of the structural gene for sigma G and that sigma F activity can be modified by the product of a gene, spoIIAB, has led us to investigate the role of spoIIAB during sporulation.
These observations confirm that spoIIAB is essential for sporulation and are consistent with models in which the product of spoIIAB plays a role in regulating the timing and/or compartment specificity of sigma F- and sigma G-directed transcription.
One such factor, sigma D (sigma 28), is expressed during vegetative growth and has been implicated in the transcription of a regulon of genes expressed during exponential growth and the early stationary phase.
The structural gene (sigK) for the mother-cell RNA polymerase sigma-factor sigma K in Bacillus subtilis is a composite of two truncated genes, named spoIVCB and spoIIIC, which are brought together by site-specific recombination during sporulation.
Transcription of these genes is mediated by RNA polymerase containing sigma G (E sigma G), the product of the sigG gene, which is itself expressed at stage III in the developing forespore.
In vitro studies demonstrated that the Bacillus subtilis subtilisin gene (aprE) could be transcribed by RNA polymerase holoenzyme reconstituted from core and sigma A factor obtained from vegetative cells.
S1 nuclease mapping experiments showed that the sdh operon is transcribed from a sigma-43 promoter; the transcript starts at a guanosine residue 90 base pairs upstream from the first gene of the operon, sdhC.
In the present report we describe a promoter that is adjacent to the rrnB region of the B. subtilis chromosome and is utilized in vitro and in vivo by E sigma 29.
One branch leads to expression of spoVA within the spore compartment, the other to expression of spoIIIC in the mother cell.
Transcription of amyE initiates in vitro from a promoter recognized by the major vegetative form of RNA polymerase, E sigma 43.
Three promoters direct transcription of the sigA (rpoD) operon in Bacillus subtilis.
Nuclease S1 mapping was used to identify the transcription start points of the spoIIA and spoVA operons of Bacillus subtilis.
Here we report that several base substitutions in the ctc promoter differentially affect the utilization of the promoter by E sigma 37 or E sigma 29.
The promoter (amyP) of the Bacillus subtilis alpha-amylase gene, which is recognized by E sigma A, has a three out of six match to the consensus promoter in both the -35 and -10 hexamers.
Two such amino acid substitutions were isolated in sigma A and one was isolated in sigma H.
Three genes called rocD, rocE and rocF were found near the rocR gene in B. subtilis.
SpoIIAB is also a serine kinase that inactivates SpoIIAA.
The promoter of this operon is recognized by RNA polymerase containing the sigma 54-like factor sigma L.
Finally, we present evidence that SinR controls sporulation through several independent genes, i.e., sp0A, spoIIA, and possibly spoIIG and spoIIE.
Such promoters depend on sigma factors (sigma D and sigma F, respectively) particularly similar to the deduced whiG gene product.
The hydropathy profiles of the dltB and dltD gene products suggest a transmembrane location for the former and an amino-terminal signal peptide for the latter.
Like the promoter for cotB, the cotG promoter is induced at a late stage of sporulation under the control of the RNA polymerase sigma factor sigma K and the DNA-binding protein GerE.
Activation of sigma E depends on sigma F, the factor that governs transcription in the forespore.
We have identified and characterized a sigma F-dependent gene, csfX, encoding a protein necessary and sufficient for triggering processing of pro-sigma E.
Mother-cell-specific gene expression during sporulation of Bacillus subtilis is controlled by sigma E and sigma K RNA polymerases.
Primer extension analysis suggested that the cwlB operon is transcribed by E sigma D and E sigma A, the former transcripts being predominants at the exponential growth phase.
Transcription of cheV initiates from a sigma D-dependent promoter element both in vivo and in vitro, and expression of a cheV-lacZ fusion is completely dependent on sigD.
In vivo expression of the spoIIG promoter is activated shortly after the onset of sporulation and is dependent on kinA, spo0F, spo0B and spo0A genes.
spoVD transcription appears to occur from a promoter recognized by the sigma E form of RNA polymerase.
Reconstitution analysis of sigma E purified from the sporulating cell extracts and vegetative core RNA polymerase showed that sigma E recognizes the P2 promoter.
RsbW efficiently blocked sigma B-dependent transcription but only if it was incubated with sigma B prior to the addition of the core enzyme.
We conclude that spoIIM is a member of the sigma E regulon and that it may be transcribed exclusively by E sigma E.
Activation of sigma E requires expression of the sigma F-directed gene spoIIR.
The gbsA and gbsB genes are transcribed in the same direction, are separated by a short intergenic region, and are likely to form an operon.
In some conditions, this gene can be transcribed by RNA polymerase associated with either sigma F or sigma G, in contrast to previous studies implying exclusive control by sigma G.
We have shown previously that the transcription of degR is driven by an alternative sigma factor, sigmaD.
From these results we conclude that ComK negatively regulates degR expression by preventing sigmaD-driven transcription of degR, possibly through interaction with the control region.
We overproduced and purified sigma(X) from Escherichia coli and demonstrate that in vitro, both sigma(A) and sigma(X) holoenzymes recognize promoter elements within the sigX-ypuN control region.
Transcriptional studies showed that nadE is strongly induced in response to heat, ethanol and salt stress or after starvation for glucose in a sigma B-dependent manner.
Bacillus subtilis Spo0A activates transcription from both sigmaA- and sigmaH-dependent promoters.
Transcriptional studies demonstrated that the expression from the araE promoter is induced by L-arabinose, repressed by glucose, and negatively regulated by AraR.
DNA sequences upstream of P1 were similar to consensus SigK-dependent promoters, while P2 and P3 were similar to consensus SigE-dependent promoters.
The start point of transcription is preceded by potential promoter sequences for sigmaA, sigmaB and sigmaD.
These data indicate that katX is an additional member of the forespore-specific sigmaF regulon.
One class of Spo0A-activated promoter, which includes spoIIEp, is recognized by RNA polymerase associated with the primary sigma factor, sigma A (sigmaA); the second, which includes spoIIAp, is recognized by RNA polymerase associated with an early-sporulation sigma factor, sigma H (sigmaH).
A sigmaW-dependent promoter (PW) precedes sigW, demonstrating that this transcription factor is positively autoregulated.
ykzA is therefore another example of a gene common to the RpoS and sigmaB stress regulons of E. coli and B. subtilis, respectively.
ComK negatively controls the transcription of hag by stimulating the transcription of comF-flgM, thereby increasing the production of the FlgM antisigma factor that inhibits sigmaD activity.
Both Spo0A~P and Spo0ABD stimulated transcription from the spoIIG promoter 10-fold more efficiently than Spo0A.
Primer extension experiments and Northern blot analysis show that an active sigmaA-dependent promoter precedes kdgR and transcription is terminated at the putative p-independent terminator downstream of kdgT.
This indicates that the yvyD gene product, being a member of both the sigmaB and sigmaH regulons, might negatively regulate the activity of the sigmaL regulon.
In addition to the typical sigmaB-dependent, stress- and starvation-inducible pattern, yvyD is also induced in response to amino acid depletion.
The Bacillus subtilis clpC operon is regulated by two stress induction pathways relying on either sigmaB or a class III stress induction mechanism acting at a sigmaA-like promoter.
Our data demonstrate that the CtsR protein acts as a global repressor of the clpC operon, as well as other class III heat shock genes, by preventing unstressed transcription from either the sigmaB- or sigmaA-dependent promoter and might be inactivated or dissociate under inducing stress conditions.
sspG transcription also requires the DNA binding protein GerE.
The sigma W regulon includes a penicillin binding protein (PBP4*) and a co-transcribed amino acid racemase (RacX), homologues of signal peptide peptidase (YteI), flotillin (YuaG), ABC transporters (YknXYZ), non-haem bromoperoxidase (YdjP), epoxide hydrolase (YfhM) and three small peptides with structural similarities to bacteriocin precursor polypeptides.
